Source: PDF entitled W~Emily Simmons~Education Transformation Proposal- Draft Language~2-25-2025.pdf. The heading says "draft 4.1" and the background watermark indicates UNEDITED DRAFT. Later changes will supersede the text here.

Note: this document was manually edited to remove any strikethroughs to the existing statute and reflects the current draft's included text. Small typographical errors or omissions may be present. Consult the full text for reference.


Subject: Education; school districts; education finance; property taxes; Agency of Education; State Board of Education

Statement of purpose of bill as introduced: This bill proposes to transform

Vermont’s education governance, quality, and finance systems. It would

create five school districts to govern the public education system for the entire

State, each governed by a school board and operated by a central office. This

bill also proposes to transform Vermont’s education financing system to a

foundation formula, with a base amount of $13,200.00 per student, in fiscal

year 2025, with additional weights based on student need, school scale, and

district sparsity, developed based on an evidence-based model that has been

adjusted to the Vermont context.





An act relating to transforming Vermont’s education governance, quality,
and finance systems

It is hereby enacted by the General Assembly of the State of Vermont:

* * * Findings and Intent * * *

Sec. 1. FINDINGS; INTENT

The General Assembly finds that:




(1) The study commissioned in 2024 titled “An Evidence-Based

Approach to Identifying an Adequate Education Spending Level in Vermont”

by Allan Odden and Lawrence O. Picus evaluated Vermont education spending

against research-informed best practices. The Evidence-Based Model is

designed to identify an array of staffing and resources that high-performing

schools need to provide every student with robust opportunities to meet college

and career-ready standards.  Performing to those standards would substantially

improve student achievement and reduce demographic related performance

gaps.

(2) The Evidence-Based Model represents an adequate model for the

level of education funding necessary to improve student achievement. It was

developed by experts in education funding with more than 25 years of

experience across the United States in determining how to adequately fund

schools, meaning providing a level of resources that would enable schools to

provide every student with an equal opportunity to learn to high performance

standards. The State has a Constitutional obligation to ensure that all students

are provided a quality education on a reasonably equal basis, without regard to

town of residence. Doing so will require significant change to the current

system of education.

(3) Vermont’s current funding model equalizes school district ability to

raise education taxes, leveling out the distinctions in property wealth among




districts. The current funding system does not provide equalized education

dollars to districts. The choice to spend or not spend equitable amounts of

education funding per student across the state rests with individual districts.

Spending patterns demonstrate that many districts do not utilize the tax

equalization mechanisms to increase spending, even in the districts with the

most demonstrated student need.

(4) Vermont’s current school and school district sizes do not align with

the Evidence-Based Model, and contribute to higher costs that are not fully

addressed by the Model. In order to ensure the Model can be implemented in a

way that improves education quality, the State must be organized into larger

school districts that are responsible for approximately at minimum 3,900

students, a population that represents the minimum to achieve efficiency in

delivering the evidence-based model.

(5) Additionally, larger school districts, consistent with state-level

guidance for school size, average class size, and budgetary priorities, must

examine the appropriate number of schools for the student population,

geography, student need and community desires of the school district.

(6) The intent of the proposed five districts is to charge school boards to

represent a diverse set of student and community needs to promote equitable

budgeting and district policies and to create central offices that provide




specialized resources and support for students and teachers in alignment with

best practices for teaching and learning.

Sec. 2. 16 V.S.A. § 43 is amended to read:

§ 43. FEDERAL EDUCATION AID FUNDS; ADMINISTRATION; LOCAL

EDUCATION AGENCY

(a) The Agency, as sole state agency, may administer federal funds made

available to the State under the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of

1965, Public L. No. 89-10, as amended, and the No Child Left Behind Act of

2001, Public L. No. 107-110. Those funds may be accepted and shall be

distributed and accounted for by the State Treasurer in accordance with that

law and rules and regulations of the United States issued under it if there is

conflict between that law or those rules and regulations and the laws of this

State.

(b) For purposes of distribution of funds under this section, a supervisory

union school district shall be a local education agency as that term is defined in

16	20 U.S.C. § 7801(26).

(c) For purposes of determining student performance and application of

consequences for failure to meet standards and for provision of compensatory

and remedial services pursuant to 20 U.S.C. §§ 6311–6318, a supervisory

union school district shall be a local education agency.

Sec. 3. 16 V.S.A. § 212 is amended to read:




§ 212. SECRETARY’S DUTIES GENERALLY

The Secretary shall articulate a long-term strategic vision for educational

services in the State, through engagement of the education community, shall

execute those policies adopted by the State Board in the legal exercise of its

powers and shall:

(1) Coordinate the educational work of the public schools with higher

education in the State.

(2) Identify the educational goals of the public schools, provide

alternative methods of attaining those goals, and promote education in the

State.

(3) Evaluate the program of instruction in the public schools Establish,

through rulemaking, education and district quality standards to evaluate the

quality of instruction and operations in the public and school choice schools.

(4) Advise the General Assembly concerning proposed laws affecting

the public schools.

(5) Supervise and direct the execution of the laws relating to the public

schools and ensure compliance.

(6) Supervise the expenditure and distribution of all money appropriated

by the State under the provisions of this title for public schools.

(7) Arrange conferences and summer schools for superintendents and

teachers and employ suitable speakers, lecturers, and instructors for the same;




fix the amount of tuition for the instruction; provide for educational gatherings,

institutes, summer schools, and other supplementary educational activities; and

provide for cooperation with the Board of Libraries established by 22 V.S.A.

§ 602 or the State Librarian.

(8) Provide clear,

transparent and high quality information to citizens regarding the condition and

opportunities within the public education system.

(9) Establish requirements for information to be submitted by school

districts, including necessary statistical data and other information and ensure,

 that data are reported in a uniform way. 

(10) Make recommendations to school boards regarding transportation

policies.

(12) Distribute at his or her discretion upon request to approved

independent schools appropriate forms and materials relating to the education

quality standards for elementary and secondary students.

(13) Ensure the provision of services to children and adolescents with a

severe emotional disturbance in coordination with the Departments of Mental

Health, for Children and Families, and of Disabilities, Aging, and Independent

Living pursuant to the provisions of 33 V.S.A. chapter 43.

(14) Annually, communicate to each superintendent a list of information

that a supervisory union, a school board, a school district, a school, or a school

district employee, or a supervisory union employee is required under State or

federal law to make available to the electorate, community members, parents,

or students. It is the intent of this subdivision that the Secretary shall make a

good faith effort to compile a complete list of the information to be made

available. Due to the difficult nature of compiling such a list, it is also the

intent that failure to include relevant information on the list shall not constitute

grounds for an action against the Secretary.

(15) Annually, with the Commissioner of Health, shall jointly inform

superintendents and principals of appropriate practices regarding students with

life-threatening allergies and chronic illnesses; and prepare and distribute




policies, training materials, and school guidelines for managing students with

life-threatening allergies and chronic illnesses, including family

responsibilities, school responsibilities, and student responsibilities.

(16) Annually, convene a meeting of directors of Vermont educator

preparation programs and representatives of school boards, superintendents,

principals, educators, and the Vermont Standards Board to determine subject

and geographic areas in which there is a critical need for educators and to

discuss ways to meet the need.

(17) Encourage and facilitate collaboration among school districts and

supervisory unions to share information and expertise regarding low-incidence

special education needs.

(18) Annually, inform superintendents and principals of regional

resources available to assist schools to provide instruction in cardiopulmonary

resuscitation and the use of automated external defibrillators and provide

updated information to the education community regarding the provision of a

comprehensive health education.

(19) Establish an information clearinghouse and accessible database to

help districts share information about educational programs and practices that

improve student performance. Educational programs and practices include

those designed to create and sustain a safe learning environment.




(20) Develop, in consultation with the Secretary of State, and make

available to school boards sample ballot language for issues that may be

decided by Australian ballot and for which no statutory language exists.

(21) Prepare a budget for the Agency and submit it to the Governor after

review by the State Board.

(22) Annually, prior to September 1, present the Governor’s education

policy priorities to the State Board.

(23) Make regulations governing the attendance and records of

attendance of all students and the deportment of students attending public

schools.

(24) Implement and continually update standards for student

performance in appropriate content areas and at appropriate intervals in the

continuum from kindergarten to grade 12 and methods of assessment to

determine attainment of the standards for student performance. The standards

shall be rigorous, challenging, and designed to prepare students to participate

in and contribute to the democratic process and to compete in the global

marketplace. The standards shall include a standard for reading level

proficiency for students completing grade three.

(25) By rule, determine statewide graduation standards.

(26) Provide oversight for adult education and literacy programs and

perform all the duties and powers prescribed by law pertaining to adult




education and literacy and to act as the State approval agency for educational

institutions conducting programs of adult education and literacy.

(27) Report annually on the condition of education statewide and on a

school district basis. The report shall include information on attainment of

standards for student performance adopted under subdivision (24) of this

section, number and types of complaints of hazing, harassment, or bullying

made pursuant to chapter 9, subchapter 5 of this title and responses to the

complaints, financial resources and expenditures, and community social

indicators. The report shall be organized and presented in a way that is easily

understandable by the general public and that enables each school, school

district, and supervisory union to determine its strengths and weaknesses. To

the extent consistent with State and federal privacy laws and regulations, data

on hazing, harassment, or bullying incidents shall be disaggregated by incident

type, including disaggregation by ethnic groups, racial groups, religious

groups, gender, sexual orientation, gender identity, disability status, and

English language learner status. The Secretary shall use the information in the

report to determine whether students in each school, school district, and

supervisory union are provided educational opportunities substantially equal to

those provided in other schools, school districts, and supervisory unions

pursuant to subsection 165(b) of this title.




(28) Ensure that Vermont’s students, including students enrolled in

secondary career technical education, have access to a substantially equal

educational opportunity by developing a system to evaluate the equalizing

effects of Vermont’s education finance system and education quality standards

under section 165 of this title.

Sec. 4. 16 V.S.A. § 164 is amended to read:

§ 164. STATE BOARD; GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES

The State Board shall engage local school board members 
and, consistent with the provisions of this title, its own

rules, and rules adopted by the Secretary, 

contribute to  a long-term strategic vision articulated by the Secretary of

Education for the delivery of educational services in Vermont; 
and act in accordance

with legislative mandates, including the adoption of rules and executing special

assignments. In addition to other specified duties, the Board shall:

(1) Establish such advisory commissions as in the judgment of the

Board will be of assistance to it in carrying out its duties. Advisory

commission members shall serve with or without compensation at the

discretion of the Board but shall receive actual expenses incurred in pursuance

of their duties.




(2) Have the authority to enter into agreements with school districts,

municipalities, states, the United States, foundations, agencies, or individuals

for service, educational programs, or research projects.

(3) Examine and determine all appeals that by law are made to it and

prescribe rules of practice in respect thereto, not inconsistent with law.

(4) [Repealed.]

(5) [Repealed.]


(7) Adopt rules pursuant to 3 V.S.A. chapter 25 to carry out the powers

and duties of the Board as directed by the General Assembly, within the

limitations of legislative intent.


(20) Pursuant to section 806g of this title, constitute the State Council

for the Interstate Compact on Educational Opportunity for Military Children

and appoint to the Council a Compact Commissioner and Military Family

Education Liaison, who may be the same person. The Board may appoint

additional members.

(21) Report annually to the Governor and the General Assembly on the

progress the Board has made in the execution of its enumerated duties 

(22) Administer a statewide contract to provide annual training to school

board members on educational leadership and the roles and responsibilities of

the school district board. The State Board will select an appropriate training

vendor to speak to the Vermont context and to be informed by research-based

best practices.




(23) Annually, review each school district’s adopted equity budget

policy, and coordinate with school districts on the content and implementation

considerations for those policies.

(24) Annually, review the outcome of the District Quality Standards

evaluation of school board proficiency published by the Agency of Education.

The State Board shall convene public discussions with each school district to

identify areas for improvement, and to define the role(s) of the school board in

improving districtwide practices.

Sec. 5. 16 V.S.A. § 165 is amended as follows:

§ 165. EDUCATION QUALITY STANDARDS; EQUAL EDUCATIONAL

OPPORTUNITIES; 

(a) In order to carry out Vermont’s policy that all Vermont children will be

afforded educational opportunities that are substantially equal in quality, each

Vermont public school, including each career technical center, shall meet the

following education quality standards:

(1) The school, through a process including parents, teachers, students,

and community members, develops, implements, and annually updates a

continuous improvement plan to improve student performance within the

school. The plan shall include goals and objectives for improved student

learning and educational strategies and activities to achieve its goals. The plan




shall also address the effectiveness of efforts made since the previous

continuous improvement plan to ensure the school maintains a safe, orderly,

civil, and positive learning environment that is free from harassment, hazing,

and bullying. The school shall assess student performance under the plan

using a method or methods of assessment developed under subdivision 164(9)

of this title.

(2) The school, at least annually, reports student performance results to

community members in a format selected by the school board. In the case of a

regional career technical center, the community means the school districts in

the service region. The school report shall include:

(A) Information indicating progress toward meeting standards from

the most recent measure taken.

(B) [Repealed.]

(C) Information indicating progress toward meeting the goals of an

annual continuous improvement plan.

(D) Any other statistical information about the school or community

that the school board deems necessary to place student performance results in

context.

(E)–(G) [Repealed.]

(H) A description of how the school ensures that each student

receives appropriate career counseling and program information regarding




availability of education and apprenticeship program offerings at career

technical centers.

(I) [Repealed.]

(J) If the school is a secondary school, information and supporting

data presented in a manner designed to protect student confidentiality on the

dropout and graduation rates.

(K) Data provided by the Secretary that enable a comparison with

other schools, or school districts if school level data are not available, for cost-

effectiveness. The Secretary shall establish which data are to be included

pursuant to this subdivision and, notwithstanding that the other elements of the

report are to be presented in a format selected by the school board, shall

develop a common format to be used by each school in presenting the data to

community members. The Secretary shall provide the most recent data

available to each school no later than October 1 of each year.  Data to be

presented include student-to-teacher ratio, administrator-to-student ratio,

administrator-to-teacher ratio, and cost per pupil.

(3) The school substantially meets standards adopted by rule of the State

Board Agency of Education regarding conditions, practices, and resources of

schools. The standards shall address those aspects of the following that are

most closely associated with improving student performance:




(A) school leadership, staffing, average minimum class sizes, and

support services;

(i) the standards governing average minimum class size shall

require that for grades four through 12 average class sizes to be equivalent to

teacher to student ratio of 1:25 and for grades kindergarten through three shall

be equivalent to teacher to student ratios of 15:1;

(B) instructional practices and curriculum leadership, content, and

coordination;

(C) educational materials and school facilities;

(D) access to current technology.

(4) The school shall provide for and the staff shall use needs-based

professional development designed to improve the quality of education

provided to the students and directly connected to standards for student

performance established by the State Board Agency of Education and any

other educational performance goals established by the school board.

(5) The school uses staff evaluation to advance educational performance

objectives.

(6) The school ensures that students receive appropriate career

counseling and program information regarding the availability of education

and apprenticeship program offerings at career technical centers. In addition,




the school, if it is a secondary school, offers a genuine opportunity to access

career technical education programs.

(7) The school ensures that students are furnished educational services

in accordance with any State or federal entitlements and in a nondiscriminatory

manner.

(8) The school maintains a safe, orderly, civil, and positive learning

environment that is free from hazing, harassment, and bullying, and is based on

sound instructional and classroom management practices and clear discipline

policies that are consistently and effectively enforced.

(b) Annually, the Secretary shall determine whether students in each

Vermont public school are provided educational opportunities substantially

equal to those provided in other public schools.  If the Secretary determines

that a school is not meeting the education quality standards listed in subsection

(a) of this section or that the school is making insufficient progress in

improving student performance in relation to the standards for student

performance set forth in subdivision 164(9) of this title, he or she shall

describe in writing actions that a district must take in order to meet either or

both sets of standards and shall provide technical assistance to the school. If

the school fails to meet the standards or make sufficient progress within two

years of the determination, the Secretary shall recommend to the State Board

one or more of the following actions:




(1) the Agency continue to provide technical assistance for one more

cycle of review;

(2) the State Board adjust supervisory union boundaries or

responsibilities of the superintendency pursuant to section 242 of this title;

(3) the Secretary assume administrative control of an individual school,

or school district, or supervisory union, including budgetary control to ensure

sound financial practices, only to the extent necessary to correct deficiencies;

(4) the State Board close an individual school or schools and require that

the school district pay tuition to another public school or an approved

independent school pursuant to chapter 21 of this title assign students to a

different school operated by the district; or

(5) the State Board require two or more school districts to consolidate

their governance structures.

(c) The State Board, after offering the school board an opportunity for a

hearing, shall either dismiss the Secretary’s recommendation or order that one

or more of the actions listed in subsection (b) of this section be taken. The

action ordered by the State Board shall be the least intrusive consistent with the

need to provide students attending the school substantially equal educational

opportunities. A school board aggrieved by an order of the State Board may

appeal the order in accordance with the Rules of Civil Procedure.




(d) Nothing in this section shall be construed to entitle any student to

educational programs or services identical to those received by students in the

same or any other school district. Further, nothing in this section shall create a

private right of action.

(e) If the Secretary determines at any time that the failure of a school to

meet the education quality standards listed in subsection (a) of this section is

severe or pervasive, potentially results in physical or emotional harm to

students or significant deprivation of equal education opportunities, and the

school has either unreasonably refused to remedy the problem or its efforts

have proved ineffective, he or she may recommend to the State Board one or

more of the actions listed in subsection (b) of this section.  The State Board

shall then follow the procedure of subsection (c) of this section.


(g) In addition to the education quality standards provided in subsection (a)

of this section, each Vermont school district shall meet the school district

quality standards adopted by rule of the Agency of Education regarding the

business, facilities management, and governance practices of school districts.

These standards shall include a process for school district quality reviews to be

conducted by the Agency of Education. Annually, the Secretary shall publish

metrics regarding the outcomes of school district quality reviews.

Sec. 6. 16 V.S.A. § 166 is amended to read:

§ 166. APPROVED AND RECOGNIZED INDEPENDENT SCHOOLS;

INDEPENDENT SCHOOL SERVING AS SCHOOL CHOICE

SCHOOL FOR GRADES 9–12

(a) Authority. An independent school may operate and provide elementary

education or secondary education if it is recognized or

designated as a school choice school as set forth in this section.


(3) A recognized independent school shall

provide to the parent or guardian responsible for each of its students, prior to

accepting any money for a student, an accurate statement in writing of its

status under this section and a copy of this section. Failure to comply with this

provision may create a permissible inference of false advertising in violation of

18	13 V.S.A. § 2005.

(4) Each school choice school designated by a

school district pursuant to school shall provide to the Secretary on October 1 of

each year the names, genders, dates of birth, and addresses of its enrolled




students. Within seven days of the termination of a student’s enrollment, the

school choice school shall notify the Secretary of the name and address of the

student. The Secretary shall notify the appropriate school officials as provided

in section 1126 of this title.


(7) Approval for independent residential schools under this subsection is

also contingent upon proof of the school’s satisfactory completion of an annual

fire safety inspection by the Department of Public Safety or its designee

pursuant to 20 V.S.A. chapter 173, subchapter 2. A certificate executed by the

inspecting entity, declaring satisfactory completion of the inspection and

identifying the date by which a new inspection must occur, shall be posted at

the school in a public location. The school shall provide a copy of the

certificate to the Secretary of Education after each annual inspection. The

school shall pay the actual cost of the inspection unless waived or reduced by

the inspecting entity.



State Board.

(iii) If the State Board concludes that an approved independent


this section.

(iv) In considering whether an independent school lacks financial

School Choice Schools. An independent school may be designated as a

School Choice School to serve grades 9–12 by the school district in which it is

geographically located. In order to be eligible for designation, an independent

school shall be certified by th Agency of Education as meeting the following

criteria:

(1) use of state standardized assessments,

(2) implementation of minimum state graduation requirements,

(3) the provision of special education services to all enrolled students to

the same extent as would be required of a public school operated by a school

district,

(4) completion of an annual single-audit by a certified public

accountant, which shall be submitted to the Agency of Education,

(5) maintenance of minimum financial reserves, in an amount to be

established by rules adopted by the Agency of Education,

(6) Compliance with the school choice school requirements of the

Education Quality Standards as defined by the Secretary through rule making,

(7) Compliance with school safety requirements in chapter 33 of this

title,

(8) Adherence in all policies and operations with nondiscrimination

requirements of Title 9 chapter 139,




(9) Adoption of harassment, hazing, and bullying prevention policies

required by chapter 9, subchapter 5 of this title; except that the board shall

follow its own procedures for adopting policy,

(10) The school annually announces a capacity for incoming students to

attend on a publicly funded basis in the following school year,

(11) The school was an approved independent school on July 1, 2025,

(12) The school’s enrollment is at least 51 percent comprised of students

attending on a district-funded tuition basis as of July 1, 2025,

(13) The school has a policy to govern a nondiscriminatory lottery

system for determining which students may enroll in the school on a publicly

funded basis when student interest exceeds capacity.

(14) The school offers due process protections prior to suspending or

expelling a student attending on a publicly funded basis that are at least as

comprehensive as those required of public schools in section 1162 of this title.

(c) Recognized independent schools. Upon filing an enrollment notice, a

recognized independent school may provide elementary or secondary

education in Vermont. The enrollment notice shall be on a form provided by

the Secretary and shall be filed with the Secretary no earlier than three months

before the beginning of the school year for the public schools in the town in

which the applicant proposes to locate.




(1) The enrollment notice shall contain the following information and

assurances:

(A) a statement that the school will be in session an amount of time

substantially equivalent to that required for public schools;

(B) a detailed description or outline of the minimum course of study

for each grade level the school offers and how the annual assessment of each

student will be performed; and

(C) assurances that:

(i) the school will prepare and maintain attendance records for

each student enrolled or regularly attending classes;

(ii) at least once each year, the school will assess each student’s

progress, and will maintain records of that assessment, and present the result of

that assessment to each student’s parent or guardian;

(iii) the school’s educational program will include the minimum

course of study set forth in section 906 of this title;

(iv) the school will have teachers and materials sufficient to carry

out the school’s educational program; and

(v) the school will meet such State and federal laws and

regulations concerning its physical facilities and health and safety matters as

are applicable to recognized independent schools.




(2) If the Secretary has information that creates significant doubt about

whether the school would be able to meet the requirements set forth in this

subsection (c), the Secretary may call a hearing. At the hearing, the school

shall establish that it can meet the requirements for recognized independent

schools. Failure to do so shall result in a finding by the Secretary that the

school must take specified action to come into compliance within a specified

time frame or the children enrolled must attend another recognized

independent school, a public school, an approved independent school, or a

home study program, or be declared truant unless absent with legal excuse.

(3) A recognized independent school shall provide to each student’s

parent or guardian a copy of its currently filed statement of objectives and a

copy of this section. The copy shall be provided when the student enrolls or

before September 1, whichever comes later. Failure to comply with this

subsection may create a permissible inference of false advertising in violation

15	of 13 V.S.A. § 2005.

(4) A recognized independent school shall renew its enrollment notice

annually. An independent school shall be recognized for a period not to

exceed five years by the Secretary without need for filing an annual enrollment

notice if:

(A) it is recognized by an organization approved by the State Board

for the purpose of recognizing such school; or




(B) it is accredited by a private, state, or regional agency approved by

the State Board for accrediting purposes; provided, however, nothing in this

subdivision (4) shall be construed to prohibit the Secretary from initiating a

hearing under this subsection (c).

(5) If the Secretary has information that creates significant doubt about

whether the school, once in operation, is meeting the requirements for

recognized independent schools, the Secretary may call a hearing. At the

hearing, the school shall establish that it has met the requirements for

recognized independent schools. Failure to do so shall result in a finding by

the Secretary that:

(A) the school may not be in operation for the remainder of the

school year and that the children are truant unless absent with legal excuse or

enrolled in a public school, an independent school, another recognized

independent school, or a home study program; or

(B) the school must take specified action to come into compliance

within a specified time frame or the school will not be permitted to operate for

the remainder of the school year.

(6) Each recognized independent school shall provide to the Secretary

on October 1 of each year the names, genders, dates of birth, and addresses of

its enrolled students. Within seven days of the termination of a student’s

enrollment, the recognized independent school shall notify the Secretary of the




name and address of the student. The Secretary shall notify the appropriate

school officials as provided in section 1126 of this title.

(7) After the filing of the enrollment notice or at a hearing, if the school

is unable to comply with any specific requirements due to deep religious

conviction shared by an organized group, the Secretary may waive such

requirements if he or she determines that the educational purposes of this

subsection are being or will be substantially met.





(e) Harassment, hazing, and bullying policies. The board of trustees of 
a recognized independent school operating in Vermont shall adopt

harassment, hazing, and bullying prevention policies; establish procedures for

dealing with harassment, hazing, and bullying of students; and provide notice

of these. The provisions of chapter 9, subchapter 5 of this title for public

schools shall apply to this subsection, except that the board shall follow its

own procedures for adopting policy.


Sec. 7. AGENCY OF EDUCATION STUDY OF COOPERATIVE

EDUCATION SERVICES AND THERAPEUTIC PROGRAMS,

STATEWIDE SALARY SCHEDULE; REPORT




The Agency of Education shall convene superintendents, directors of

therapeutic independent schools, special education directors and other experts

in the opinion of the Agency to study the need for cooperative education

services and the oversight of therapeutic schools within the governance

framework created by this Act.  The Agency shall submit a summary of its

findings and recommended legislative language to the House Committee on

Education and the Senate Committee on Education on or before December 15,

2025. The Agency shall also submit recommendations for legislative language

to implement a statewide salary schedule with its report.

Sec. 8. 16 V.S.A. § 241 is amended to read:

§ 241. APPOINTMENT

(a) Each supervisory union board, with the advice of the Secretary, may

shall employ a superintendent of schools.

(b) A superintendent shall be employed by written contract for a term not

to exceed five years nor less than one year and shall work the number of hours

required by contract, performing the duties designated in the contract or

assigned by the board. A superintendent of schools may be dismissed for

cause or as specified in the contract of employment.

(c) Not later than May 15 of a year in which an incumbent superintendent’s

contract of employment expires, the supervisory union board shall meet to

renew or act otherwise upon the superintendent’s contract. 


Sec. 9.  16 V.S.A. § 242 is amended to read:

§ 242.  DUTIES OF SUPERINTENDENTS

The superintendent shall be the chief executive officer for the 
school board and shall:

(1) Carry out the policies adopted by the school boards relating to the

educational or business affairs of the school district and

develop procedures to do so.

(2) Prepare, for adoption by the school board, plans to achieve

the educational goals and objectives established by the school district.

(3)(A) Nominate a candidate for employment by the school district 
if the vacant position requires a licensed employee;

provided, if the board declines to hire a candidate, then the

superintendent shall nominate a new candidate;

(B) select nonlicensed employees to be employed by the district or

and




(C) dismiss licensed and nonlicensed employees of a school district

as necessary, subject to all procedural and other

protections provided by contract, collective bargaining agreement, or provision

of State and federal law.

(4)(A) Provide data and information required by the Secretary and by

using a format approved by the Secretary to:

(i) Report budgetary data for the subsequent school year and fiscal

year.

(ii) Report all financial operations within the supervisory union

district to the Secretary and State Board for the preceding school year on or

before August 15 of each year.

(iii) Report all financial operations for each member the school

district to the Secretary and State Board for the preceding school year on or

before August 15 of each year.





(5) Work with the school boards to 
implement policies regarding minimum average class sizes 
consistent with section 165 of

this title and rules adopted by the Agency.
.

(6) Arrange for the provision of the professional training required in

subsection 561(b) of this title.

(7) Provide for the general supervision of the public schools in the

district.

* * * School Governance * * *

Sec. 10. REPEAL

16 V.S.A. chapter 7 (supervisory unions) is repealed on July 1, 2027.

Sec. 11. NEW UNION SCHOOL DISTRICTS

The Vermont school districts and supervisory unions then in effect shall be

dissolved on July 1, 2027, and succeeded by five unified union school districts.

Not later than 30 days following the enactment of this section, the Secretary of

Education shall certify the designation of the newly created school districts

pursuant to section 713 of this Title.

Sec. 12. 16 V.S.A. § 2 is added to read:

§ 2. MEMBERSHIP OF FIVE UNIFIED UNION SCHOOL DISTRICTS




As of July 1, 2027:

(1) The member districts of the Barre SD, Central Vermont SU,

Harwood UUSD, Lamoille North MUUSD, Lamoille South UUSD,

Montpelier Roxbury School District, Orange Southwest SU, Orleans

Southwest SU, Orleans Southwest SU, Washington Central School District,

White River Valley School District shall constitute the Winooski Valley

UUSD.

(2) The member districts of the Bennington-Rutland SU, Greater

Rutland County SU, Mill River UUSD, Rutland City SD, Rutland Northeast

UUSD, Slate Valley UUSD, Southwest Vermont UUSD, Southwest Tech

Center shall constitute the Southwest Vermont UUSD.

(3) The member districts of Hartford SD, Mountain Views UUSD, River

Valley Tech Center, Springfield SD, Two Rivers SD, Windham Central SU,

Windham Northeast SU, Windham Southeast SU, Windham Southwest SU,

Windsor Southeast SU shall constitute the Southeast Vermont UUSD.

(4) The member districts of Caledonia Central SU, Essex North SU,

Kingdom East UUSD, North Country SU, Orange East SU, Orleans Central

UUSD, St. Johnsbury SD shall constitute the Northeast Vermont UUSD.

(5) The Addison Central SD, the Addison Norwest SD, Burlington SD,

Champlain Valley SD, Colchester SD, Essex Westford ECUUSD, Franklin

Northeast SU, Franklin West SU, Grand Isle SU, Lincoln School District,




Maple Run SD, Milton SD, Franklin Northwest SU, Mount Mansfield SD,

Patricia Hanaford Tech Center, South Burlington SD, Winooski SD shall

constitute the Champlain Valley UUSD.

(effective on passage)

Sec. 13. 16 V.S.A. § 563 is amended to read:

§ 563. POWERS OF SCHOOL BOARDS; FORM OF VOTE

The school board of a school district, in addition to other duties and

authority specifically assigned by law:

(1) Shall determine the educational policies of the school district. Board

policies shall be of general application to the district and shall be in writing,

codified, and made available to the public. Board policies shall be adopted at

regular or special school board meetings. A school board shall give public

notice of its intent to adopt a board policy, stating the substance of the

proposed policy, at least ten days prior to its adoption. A school board may

also approve or disapprove rules and regulations proposed by the principal or

superintendent for the conduct and management of public schools in the

district.

(2) May take any action that is required for the sound administration of

the school district. The Secretary, with the advice of the Attorney General,

upon application of a school board, shall decide whether any action

contemplated or taken by a school board under this subdivision is required for




the sound administration of the district and is proper under this subdivision.

The Secretary’s decision shall be final.

(3) Shall have the possession, care, control, and management of the

property of the school district, subject to the authority vested in the electorate

or any school district official.

(4) [Repealed.]

(5) Shall keep the school buildings and grounds in good repair, suitably

equipped, insured, and in safe and sanitary condition at all times. The school

board shall regulate or prohibit firearms or other dangerous or deadly weapons

on school premises. At a minimum, a school board shall adopt and implement

a policy at least consistent with section 1166 of this title and 13 V.S.A. § 4004,

relating to a student who brings a firearm to or possesses a firearm at school.

(6) Shall have discretion to furnish instruction to students who have

completed a secondary education and to administer early educational

programs.

(7) May relocate or discontinue use of a schoolhouse or facility, subject

to the provisions of sections 821 and 822 of this title.

(8) Shall establish and maintain a system for receipt, deposit,

disbursement, accounting, control, and reporting procedures that meets the

criteria established by the Agency

pursuant to section 165(g) of this title and that ensures that all payments are




lawful and in accordance with a budget adopted or amended by the school

board. The school board may authorize a subcommittee, the superintendent of

schools, or a designated employee of the school board to examine claims

against the district for school expenses and draw orders for the payment of

those claims. Such orders shall state definitely the purpose for which they are

drawn and shall serve as full authority to the treasurer to make such payments.

It shall be lawful for a school board to submit to its treasurer a certified copy of

those portions of the board minutes, properly signed by the clerk and chair, or

a majority of the board, showing to whom and for what purpose each payment

is to be made by the treasurer, and such certified copy shall serve as full

authority to the treasurer to make the payments as thus approved.

(9) Shall establish with the advice and consent of the Auditor of

Accounts and the Secretary a system of accounts for the proper control and

reporting of school district finances and for stating the annual financial

condition of the school district.

.

(11)(A) Shall prepare and distribute publish annually a proposed budget

for the next school year according to such major categories as may from time

to time be prescribed by the Secretary. The board shall hold no fewer than two

informational meetings at which the public can comment on the proposed

budget.

(B) [Repealed.]






The 	District estimates that this proposed budget, if approved, will

result in per pupil education spending of $ 	, which is 	%


(12) Shall employ such persons as may be required to carry out the work

of the school district pursuant to the provisions of subdivision 242(3) of this

title.

(13) [Repealed.]

(14) Shall provide, at the expense of the district, subject to the approval

of the superintendent, all text books, learning materials, equipment, and

supplies.

(15) Shall exercise the general powers given to a legislative branch of a

municipality.

(16) May execute contracts on behalf of the school district, including

contracts providing for binding arbitration, by its chair or any person

designated whose appointment is recorded in the minutes of the board.

16	(17)(18) [Repealed.]

(19) Shall allow any high school student who meets the academic

requirements of the high school to graduate and receive a diploma in less than

four years.

(20) Shall establish policies and procedures designed to avoid the

appearance of board member conflict of interest.




(21) Shall have the authority to engage in short-term borrowing to cover

the costs of those portions of projects approved by the State Board and that

will be reimbursed by the State Board under sections 3447–3456 of this title

but which payments will be delayed.  However, the board shall borrow under

this subdivision only amounts that it would receive if the State Board could

fund its obligation and may borrow no earlier than the time it would have

received the funds. The State shall not pay for costs of borrowing funds under

this subdivision.

(22) May apply for grants and may accept and expend grants or gifts.

The board shall include, in its annual report, a description of all grants or gifts

accepted during the year and associated expenditures.

(23) May, at the expense of the district, present informational materials

to the electorate on any matter to be voted. However, such materials shall be

limited to those that are reasonably designed to inform, educate, and explain to

the electorate the board’s position on the matter.

(24) Shall adopt a policy that, in accordance with rules adopted by the

State Board of Education Agency of Education, will integrate home study

students into its schools through enrollment in courses, participation in

cocurricular and extracurricular activities, and use of facilities.

(25) Shall 
award a high school diploma to any Vermont




resident who served in the military in World War II, the Korean War, or during

the Vietnam era, was honorably separated from active federal military service,

and does not hold a high school diploma. The Agency of

Education shall develop and make available an application form for veterans

who wish to request a high school diploma.

(26) [Repealed.]

(27) Annually, shall inform each secondary student and the student’s

parents or guardians of the right to opt out of the federal requirement that

student contact information be provided to military recruiters or institutions of

higher education pursuant to 20 U.S.C. § 7908(a). A school board shall enable

the secondary student and the student’s parents or guardians to disallow

provision of student contact information to either military recruiters or

institutions of higher education, while allowing provision of information to the

other. For purposes of this subdivision, “secondary student” means a student

15	in grade 9, 10, 11, or 12.

(28) Annually, shall inform students and their parents or guardians of

their options for school choice under applicable laws or policy.

(29) Shall assign an employee to annually:

(A) inform parents of students with life-threatening allergies and life-

threatening chronic illnesses of applicable provisions of Section 504 of the




Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and other applicable federal statutes, State statutes,

federal regulations, and State rules;

(B) inform appropriate school staff of their responsibilities; and

(C) provide necessary training to carry out these responsibilities.

(30) May make available school facilities and equipment for specified

public purposes if such purposes appear, in the judgment of the board, to be in

the best interests of the district and are an efficient, economical, and

appropriate use of the facilities and equipment.

(31) Subject to the requirements of section 571 of this title, may enter

into contracts with other school boards to provide joint programs, services,

facilities, and professional or other staff.

(32) May enter into a contract or contracts with a school offering a

distance learning program that is approved by one or more accrediting agencies

recognized by the U.S. Department of Education or is approved in Vermont

pursuant to subdivision 166(b)(6) of this title.

(33) Establish a district-wide curriculum. The curriculum shall meet the

requirements adopted by the Agency of Education under subdivision

165(a)(3)(B) of this title.

(34) Assist each school in the district to follow the curriculum as

adopted under the requirements of the Agency of Education pursuant to

subdivision 165(a)(3)(B) of this title.




(35) In accordance with criteria established by the Agency of Education

establish and implement a plan for receiving and disbursing federal and State

funds distributed by the Agency of Education, including funds awarded under

P.L. 89-10, the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 as amended.

(36) Provide professional development programs or arrange for the

provision of them, or both, for teachers, administrators, and staff within the

district, which may include programs offered solely to one school or other

component of the entire district to meet the specific needs or interests of that

component; a district has the discretion to provide financial assistance outside

the negotiated agreements for teachers’ professional development activities.

(37)  Provide special education services to resident students and

compensatory and remedial services and provide or coordinate the provision of

other educational services as directed by the Agency.

(38) Employ a person or persons qualified to provide financial and

student data management services.

(39) Provide the following services in a manner that promotes the

efficient use of financial and human resources:

(A) manage a system to procure and distribute goods and operational

services;

(B) manage construction projects;




(C) provide financial and student data management services,

including grant writing and fundraising as requested;

(D) negotiate with teachers and administrators, pursuant to chapter 57

of this title, and with other school personnel, pursuant to 21 V.S.A. chapter 22

(E) provide transportation or arrange for the provision of

transportation, or both, to schools within the district, consistent with rules

adopted by the Agency of Education;

(F) provide human resources management support.

(40) Adopt district-wide truancy policies consistent with the model

protocols developed by the Secretary.

* * * Transition to New Districts * * *

Sec. 14. 16 V.S.A. chapter 11 is amended to read:

13
Chapter 11.
Union School Districts
14

***
15
§ 702. DEFINITIONS

16

***
3) “Forming districts” means all school districts, including union school

districts, that are located within the geographical boundaries of a proposed or

voter-approved union school district, or districts that are named by the General

Assembly to be merged into a new union district on July 1, 2027, prior to the




operational date of the union school district, which will potentially merge or

have merged to form the new union school district.

3	***

15) “New Union District” shall refer to a school district created by the

General Assembly pursuant to [this Act] which shall assume operations on July

6	1, 2027.

7	***

ATTENDANCE IN ACADEMIC YEAR 2027–2028



In academic year 2027–2028, each student in the New Union District will

attend the school that a student residing in that town would have attended in

academic year 2026–2027; provided however, that the Superintendent may

grant a parent’s or guardian’s request for student enrollment in a different

school operated by the New Union District based on individual student

circumstances and the Superintendent’s determination of the school’s capacity

to serve the child. Additionally, the Superintendent may adjust student

attendance locations to respond to unforeseen circumstances, such as facilities

failures.

FINANCES


$ 	. The total proposed budget,


20	$	.”





Indebtedness, Including Capital Debt. The New Union District shall assume

all indebtedness that may exist on June 30, 2027, including capital debt and

including both principal and interest, of the Forming Districts.


Operating

Fund Surpluses.  The New Union District shall assume all operating surpluses,

deficits, and fund balances of the Forming Districts that may exist at the close

of business on June 30, 2027.

(c) The New Union District shall apply any reserve fund for the

 fund’s specific purpose, if identified, unless otherwise determined through

appropriate legal procedures.

Transfer of Debt and Funds. The Forming

Districts shall transfer the debt and funds specified in this Article to the New

Union District on or before June 30, 2027 in accordance with procedures and

timelines established by the New Union District Board.

REAL AND PERSONAL PROPERTY

Transfer of Property to the New Union District. No later

than June 30, 2027, the Forming Districts shall convey to the New Union

District, for the sum of one dollar and other good and valuable consideration,

and subject to the encumbrances of record, all of their school-related real and

personal property, including all land, buildings, and contents.


Subsequent Sale of Real Property to Town in which it is Located, in Any Year

in the Future.  Subject to any provision of law relating to duties of the New

Union District and to the sale of buildings in this Title or any other Title of the

Vermont Statutes Annotated, if the New Union District Board determines, in

its discretion, that the real property, including land and buildings, conveyed to

it by one or more of the Forming Districts will not be used for direct delivery

of education in at least one grade or for any other purpose related to operation

of the New Union District, then the New Union District shall offer for sale

such real property to the town in which the real property is located, for the sum

of one dollar, subject to all encumbrances of record, the assumption or

payment of all outstanding bonds and notes, and the repayment of any school

construction aid or grants required by Vermont law.  The conveyance of any of

the above school properties shall be conditioned upon the town owning and

using the real property for community and public purposes for a minimum of

five years. If the town elects to sell the real property prior to five years of




ownership, then the town shall compensate the New Union District for all

capital improvements and renovations initiated after July 1, 2027 and prior to

the sale to the town. If a town elects not to acquire ownership of such real

property, then the New Union District shall sell the property pursuant to

Vermont statutes and upon such terms and conditions as established by the

New Union District Board.


Subsequent Sale of Real Property Conveyed by Forming District that was a

Union School District, in Any Year in the Future. Notwithstanding Paragraph




(b) of this section, and to the sale of buildings in Title 16 or any other Title, if

the New Union District Board determines, in its discretion, that the real

property, including land and buildings, conveyed to it by a Forming District

that was a union school district on June 30, 2027, will not be used for direct

delivery of education in at least one grade or for any other purpose related to

operation of the New Union District, then the New Union District shall sell the

property pursuant to Vermont statutes and upon such terms and conditions as

are established by the New Union District Board.

TRANSPORTATION, EMPLOYEES, AND

CONTRACTS IN ACADEMIC YEAR 2027–2028

In academic year 2027–2028, the New

Union District shall provide for the transportation of students, assignment of

staff, and implementation of curriculum in a manner that is consistent with the

contracts, collective bargaining agreements, and provisions of law that are in

effect during that academic year.

The New Union District,

through its Board, shall comply with 16 V.S.A. Chapter 53, subchapter 3,

regarding recognition of the representatives of employees of the respective

Forming Districts, as the representatives of the employees of the New Union

District, and shall commence negotiations pursuant to 16 V.S.A. Chapter 57

for teachers and 21 V.S.A. Chapter 22 for other employees. In the absence of

new collective bargaining agreements on July 1, 2027, the New Union District

shall comply with the pre-existing master agreements pursuant to 16 V.S.A.

Chapter 53, subchapter 3.

The New

Union District shall honor all individual employment contracts that are in place

in the Forming Districts on June 30, 2027 until their respective termination

dates; provided, however, that if a Forming District enters into the contract on

or after May 1, 2025, then this paragraph shall apply only if the contract

expires on or before July 1, 2029.

TRANSITIONAL

BOARD


(a)  Creation of Transitional Board; Term of Existence.  Until the voters of

the New Union District elect the members of the initial Board of Directors as

set forth in section 711 of this Title, and those members are sworn in and

assume their duties, the individuals serving on December 15, 2025 on the

Boards of the Forming Districts identified in section 2 of this Title, including

the board of any Forming District that is a union school district on that date,

shall designate one of their members to serve on a transitional board of

directors for the New Union District (“Transitional Board”). The Transitional

Board shall be comprised of the designee from each Forming District.

(b) Initial Meeting of Transitional Board. The Superintendent of the

supervisory union of which a majority of the Forming Districts are members

shall convene the first meeting of the Transitional Board to occur no later than

21	January 10, 2026. The agenda for this first meeting of the Transitional Board




shall include the election by the Transitional Board members of one of their

members to serve as Chair of the Transitional Board; and One of their

members to serve as Clerk of the Transitional Board.

(c) Purpose and Authority of Transitional Board. During the period of its

existence, the Transitional Board shall serve as the New Union District’s

school board and shall perform all functions required of, and have all authority

granted to the Transitional Board in this chapter and the New Union District

Board in this title and otherwise by law.

(d) Specific Duties of Transitional Board. In addition to any

responsibilities of the New Union District Board that can, should, or must be

performed before the initial members of that Board are elected and assume

office, the Transitional Board shall perform the following functions:

(1) First Draft of Proposed Budget: Prepare a draft of the proposed

Fiscal Year 2028 budget of the New Union District, which the Transitional

Board shall provide to the New Union District Board for consideration at the

first meeting of the New Union District Board.

(2) Selection of short list of superintendent candidates.

(3) With respect to the transitional board’s duties in this section, the

transitional board shall have the assistance of the Agency of Education,

including dedicated resources to be paid by transitional funds set aside by the

Agency for these purposes.




§ 711. VOTE TO ELECT INITIAL MEMBERS OF THE UNION SCHOOL

DISTRICT BOARD

Representation on New Union District

Board. The New Union District Board shall be composed of five individuals

elected from the district. The members shall be elected pursuant to

proportionate voting districts. Petitions for candidates for initial school district

board membership shall be submitted on the same timeline and in the same

manner as candidates for the General Assembly. Elections for school board

shall be held on General Election Day 2026. Each New Union District Board

member shall serve for a period of four (4) years or until his or her successor is

elected and qualified, as required by Vermont law.

Swearing-In and Assumption of Duties. Within 14 days after the

initial Board members are elected, the Transitional Board shall provide for a

meeting of the initial board members.  Prior to the date of the meeting, newly

elected members shall be sworn in by a town clerk within the boundaries of the

District and shall assume office upon being sworn in.

At the first meeting of initial members of the

New Union District Board:

(1) The members shall elect a Chair of the Board and Clerk of the

Board.

(2) The members of the former Transitional Board shall present the draft

Fiscal Year 2028 budget to the New Union District Board together with any

supporting data or other documentation.

(3) The members of the former Transitional Board shall present a

summary of hiring actions and recommendations for the position of

superintendent for the District.






PREPARATION AND PRESENTATION OF PROPOSED FISCAL
YEAR 2028 BUDGET
between the hours of 	, at which time the polls will

open, and 	, at which time the polls will close, upon


education of resident students in grades 	through  	


one or more schools offering instruction in grades 	through

 	. 


agreement approved by the State Board of Education on the 	day

of 	, 20 	, which is on file in the office of

To elect a total of 	(_) member(s) to serve as initial


(a) 	[Insert number] Board Member[s] to serve until the second




(b) 	[Insert number] Board Member[s] to serve until the third


(c) 	[Insert number] Board Member[s] to serve until the fourth

.  Pursuant to

the provisions of Title 16 chapter 133, the New Union District Board shall

consider and adopt a proposed Fiscal Year 2028 budget to, based on the

anticipated funding for Fiscal Year 2028, provide for the operations of the

district.

§ 713. CERTIFICATION OF VOTES; DESIGNATION OF DISTRICT AS

UNION SCHOOL DISTRICT; RECORDING BY SECRETARY OF

STATE

Not later than 30 days following the passage of this

Act, the Secretary shall designate each of the New Union Districts 
as a union school district. The Secretary shall certify that

designation and send the certification together with a copy of this Act 
to the Secretary of State, who shall record the

certification.

(d) When the Secretary of State records the certification of the Secretary of

Education, the union school district shall be a body politic and corporate with

the powers incident to a municipal corporation, shall be known by the name or

number given in the recorded certification, by that name or number may sue

and be sued, and may hold and convey real and personal property for the use of

the union school district. The recorded certification shall be notice to all

parties of the formation of the union school district with all the powers incident

to such a district as provided in this title.

(e) The Secretary of State shall file a certified copy of the recorded

certification with the clerk of each member district of a new union elementary




or union high school district and with the town clerk of each town within a new

unified union school district. The Secretary of State shall file the certified

copies not later than 14 days after the date on which the Secretary of Education

certifies the existence of the union school district to the Secretary of State.

Filing a certified copy with each clerk shall be prima facie evidence of full

compliance with the requirements for the formation of a union school district

as set forth in this subchapter.

8	* * *

COMMENCEMENT OF OPERATIONS


meeting.

(B) Adopt Robert’s or other rules of order, which shall govern the

The New Union District, through its

Board, has and shall exercise all of the authority that is necessary for it to

prepare for full educational operations beginning on July 1, 2027. On or

before June 30, 2027, the New Union District Board shall perform all planning,

transitional, and other related duties necessary to begin operations of the New

Union District on July 1, 2027, including preparing for and negotiating

contractual agreements, and transacting any other lawful business that comes

before the Board, provided however, that the exercise of such authority by the

New Union District shall not be construed to limit or alter the authority or

responsibilities of each Forming District, which shall remain responsible for

providing for the education of its resident students until July 1, 2027.

16	***

19	***

Sec. 15. 16 V.S.A. § 564 is added to read:

§ 564. SCHOOL ADVISORY COMMITTEES




(a) Each school district shall establish a local school advisory committee

for each school. These committees shall have membership from parents,

community members and students to represent the gender, racial, and

socioeconomic diversity of the school community, and shall serve in an

advisory role to the school administration.

(b) Building level principals will administer the application and

membership process for the school advisory committees. School advisory

committees shall provide input to the school board on equitable budgeting

parameters and feedback on the proposed school district budget each year.

(c) A school advisory committee shall, through the administration of the

building level principal, direct a designated portion of the funding allocated to

the school it represents. Annually, the school board shall determine the

amount that each school advisory committee will have authority to direct,

which shall be equitable with respect to school size or school budget size.

Before funds are expended, the school board shall approve the proposed plan

developed by the school advisory committee.

Sec. 16. 16 V.S.A. § 821 is amended to read:

§ 821. School district to maintain public elementary schools or pay tuition

(a) Each school district shall maintain one or more approved schools within

the district in which elementary education for its resident students in

kindergarten through grade six is provided 
(b) A school board shall adopt a policy on intra-district grade K–8 choice

and update the policy as appropriate. The policy shall state whether and to

what extent resident students in elementary grades can choose a school

operated by the school district other than the school designated by the district

 for the student’s town of residence.


Sec. 17. 16 V.S.A. § 822 is amended to read:

§ 822. SCHOOL DISTRICT TO MAINTAIN PUBLIC HIGH SCHOOLS OR

PAY TUITION; SCHOOL CHOICE SCHOOLS

(a) Each school district shall maintain one or more approved high schools

in which high school education is provided for its resident students unless:

A school board shall designate at least one public or independent school

that operates grades 9–12 to receive incoming students. This school shall be

known as a School Choice School. The school board is not required to

designate an independent school if it instead designates one or more public

schools. If the School Choice School(s) designated by the district is an

independent school, it shall first be certified by the Agency of Education as

meeting School Choice School requirements in 16 V.S.A. 166. Any such

designation shall be for a period of five years.

(1) After reviewing the portfolio of school options for grades 9–12 in

the district, the school board shall adopt a policy on grade 9–12 school choice

and update the policy as appropriate. The policy shall take into consideration

historic patterns of attendance, capacity of schools, and attendance and

geographic needs of the district, along with student interest for specialized

educational programming. The policy shall state a number of resident students

in grades 9–12 that can participate in school choice, which shall be no less than

10% of the number of resident students in grades 9–12 for a given year.

(2) If the district will operate one or more of its public schools as a

school choice school, then the school board shall annually announce the

capacity for incoming students to attend each such school(s).




1

(c) Lottery

Subject to the provisions of subsection (a)(1) of this

section, if more than the allowable number of students wish to participate in

school choice, then the district shall use a nondiscriminatory lottery system for

determining which students may participate in school choice.

Subject to the provisions of subsection

(a)(2) of this section, if more than the allowable number of students wish to

transfer to a school choice school operated by the district, then the district shall

use a nondiscriminatory lottery system for determining which students may

transfer to the school choice school.




(A) the district shall give preference to the school choice request of a

student whose request to participate in school choice was denied in a prior

year;

(B) the district shall give preference to siblings of students who are

currently enrolled in the school choice school;

(C) the district shall give preference to students who reside closer to

the school choice school than a different school operated by the district.

Sec. 18. REPEALS

16 V.S.A. § 822a (public high school choice) and 16 V.S.A. § 823

(elementary tuition) are repealed on July 1, 2027.

Sec. 19. 16 V.S.A. § 824 is amended to read:

PAYMENT TO SCHOOL CHOICE

SCHOOLS

(a)  Payment for high school students attending a school choice

school that is an independent school as defined in section 166 of this title shall

be paid by the Agency of

Education in an amount equal to the weighted base education amount per

student as described in section 4001 of this title.  The Agency of Education

shall establish rules to govern the schedule and procedures for such payments.


Sec. 20. 16 V.S.A. § 1071 is amended to read:

§ 1071. SCHOOL YEAR AND SCHOOL DAY

(a) Minimum number of days. Except as provided in this section, each

public school shall be maintained and operated for:

(1) At least 175 180 student attendance days in each school year. For

purposes of this section, a majority of students enrolled in a school must be

recorded on the school roll as in attendance on any day counted as a student

attendance day.

(2) At least five teacher in-service education days, during which time

activities shall be conducted without students present in order to increase the

competency of the staff, improve the curriculum of the school, enable teachers

to attend State educational meetings, or disseminate student progress

information to parents or the community.

(b)  Hours of operation.  Within the minimum set by the State Board

Agency of Education, the school board shall fix the number of hours that shall

constitute a school day, subject to change upon the order of the State Board.

(c) Unanticipated closings. When a public school is closed for cause

beyond the control of the school board, it may petition the State Board Agency

of Education for a waiver of the requirements of this section.  The petition




shall be filed with the 
Agency on a form provided by the Agency. If

the petition is approved and a waiver granted, the school district shall be

deemed to have satisfied the requirements of this section. 
The Secretary shall establish a single

statewide calendar. The calendar shall be published before May 1 of each year

for the following school year. The calendar shall include student attendance

days, periods of vacation, holidays, and teacher in-service education days and

shall comply with subsection (a) of this section. 

(f) Additional days. Nothing in this section prohibits a school from

scheduling additional days for student attendance or teacher in-service




education. However, those days shall not conflict with any applicable school

calendar.

(g) Upon application of one or more school districts, after approval by the

voters of each such district, the State Board Agency may grant a waiver of the

requirements of subsection (a) of this section if it is satisfied that equivalent

educational programming will be maintained or improved. The waiver may be

granted for any purpose, including the conservation of energy.

Sec. 21. 16 V.S.A. § 1121 is amended to read:

§ 1121. ATTENDANCE BY CHILDREN OF SCHOOL AGE REQUIRED

A person having the control of a child between the ages of six five and 16

years shall cause the child to attend a public school, an approved or recognized

independent school, an approved education program, or a home study program

for the full number of days for which that school is held, unless the child:

(1) is mentally or physically unable so to attend; or

(2) has completed the tenth grade; or

(3) is excused by the superintendent or a majority of the school directors

as provided in this chapter; or

(4) is enrolled in and attending a postsecondary school, as defined in

subdivision 176(b)(1) of this title, which is approved or accredited in Vermont

or another state.

* * * State Funding of Public Education * * *




Sec. 22. TRANSITION YEAR ONE FUNDING

In Fiscal Year 2026, each school district shall receive the funding approved

by its electorate pursuant to 16 V.S.A. Ch 133.

Sec. 23. TRANSITION YEAR TWO FUNDING

In Fiscal Year 2027, each school district shall receive an amount equal to

the funding received in Fiscal Year 2026, multiplied by 3 percent. Payments

shall be made consistent with 16 V.S.A. § 4011.

Sec. 24. 16 V.S.A. chapter 133 is amended to read:

CHAPTER 133. STATE FUNDING OF PUBLIC EDUCATION

Subchapter 1. General Provisions

§ 4000. STATEMENT OF POLICY

(a) The intent of this chapter is to make educational opportunity available

to each student in each town on substantially equal terms, in accordance with

the Vermont Constitution and the Vermont Supreme Court decision of

15	February 5, 1997, Brigham v. State of Vermont.

(b) [Repealed.]

§ 4001. DEFINITIONS

As used in this chapter:

(1) “Average daily membership” of a school district or, 
in any year means:




(A) The full-time equivalent enrollment of students, as defined by the

Agency by rule, who are legal residents of the district or

municipality attending a school owned and operated by the district, 
during the annual census period.  The census period

consists of the 11th day through the 30th day of the school year in which

school is actually in session.

(B) The full-time equivalent enrollment in the year before the last

census period, of any State-placed students as defined in subdivision 11(a)(28)

of this title.  
A school district that is

receiving the full amount, as defined by the Agency by rule, of the

student’s education costs under subsection 2950(a) of this title shall not count

the student for purposes of determining average daily membership.  A State-

placed student who is counted in average daily membership shall be counted as

a student for the purposes of determining weighted student count.

(C) The full-time equivalent enrollment for each prekindergarten

child as follows: If a child is enrolled in 10 or more hours of prekindergarten




education per week or receives 10 or more hours of essential early education

services per week, the child shall be counted as one full-time equivalent pupil.

If a child is enrolled in six or more but fewer than 10 hours of prekindergarten

education per week or if a child receives fewer than 10 hours of essential early

education services per week, the child shall be counted as a percentage of one

full-time equivalent pupil, calculated as one multiplied by the number of hours

per week divided by ten. A child enrolled in prekindergarten education for

fewer than six hours per week shall not be included in the district’s average

daily membership. There is no limit on the total number of children who may

be enrolled in prekindergarten education or who receive essential early

education services.

(2) “Equalized grand list” has the same meaning that equalized

education property tax grand list has in 32 V.S.A. chapter 135.

14	(3), (4), (5) [Repealed.]



(7) “Long-term membership” of a school district in any school year

means the:

(A) average of the district’s average daily membership, excluding

full-time equivalent enrollment of State-placed students, over two school years,

the latter of which is the current school year, plus

(B) full-time equivalent enrollment of State-placed students for the

most recent of the two years.

(8) [Repealed.]

(9) “Public school” means an elementary school or secondary school for

which the governing board is publicly elected. A public school may maintain

evening or summer school for its students and it shall be considered a public

school.

(10) “School district” means 
a union school district

(11)  “School year” means a year beginning on July 1 and ending on the

following June 30.

(12) “Weighted long-term membership” of a school district in any

school year means the long-term membership adjusted pursuant to section

4010 of this title.

(13) Categorical base amount” means a number

used to calculate categorical grants awarded under this title that is equal to

$6,800.00 per equalized pupil, adjusted as required under section 4011 of this

title.



(15) “Prekindergarten child” means a three- or four-year-old child who

is enrolled in a prekindergarten program offered by or through a school district

pursuant to rules adopted under section 829 of this title or who is receiving

essential early education services offered pursuant to section 2956 of this title.

Prekindergarten child also means a five-year-old child who otherwise meets

the terms of this definition if that child is not yet eligible for or enrolled in

kindergarten.




(16) “Base amount” means a per pupil amount of $13,200.00 in fiscal

year 2025, which shall be adjusted for inflation annually on or before

3	November 15 by the Secretary of Education. As used in this subdivision,

 “adjusted for inflation” means adjusting the base dollar amount by the most

recent New England Economic Project cumulative price index, as of

6	November 15, for state and local government purchases of goods and services,

from fiscal year 2025 through the fiscal year for which the amount is being

determined.

(17) “Foundation formula amount” means the base amount multiplied

by the school district’s weighted long-term membership as determined under

11	16 V.S.A. § 4010.

§ 4002. PAYMENT; ALLOCATION

(a) State and federal funds appropriated for services delivered by the

school district and payable through the Agency shall be paid

to the order of the school district and administered in

accordance with the plan adopted under subdivision 261a(4) of this title.

Funding for special education services under section 2969 of this title shall be

paid to the school districts in accordance with that section.

(b) The Secretary shall notify the superintendent or chief executive officer

of each school district in writing of federal or State funds

disbursed to school districts.




§ 4003. CONDITIONS

(a) No school district shall receive any aid under this chapter unless that

school district complies with the provisions of law relative to teachers’

salaries, appointment of superintendents, detailed financial reports to the

Agency, and any other requirements of law.

(b) Aid to any district shall not be denied unless the district unreasonably

refuses to comply with the requirements of law. Any school district denied aid

by reason of the provisions of this section shall have the right within 60 days

from the date of such denial to appeal to the Superior Court in the county

where the district is situated.

Subchapter 2. General State Funding of Public Education

§ 4010. DETERMINATION OF WEIGHTED LONG-TERM MEMBERSHIP


(a) Definitions. As used in this section:

(1) “EL pupils” means pupils described under section 4013 of this title.

(2) “FPL” means the Federal Poverty Level.

(3) “Weighting categories” means the categories listed under subsection

(b) of this section.

(b) Determination of average daily membership and weighting categories.

On or before the first day of December during each school year, the Secretary

shall determine the average daily membership, as defined in subdivision




4001(1) of this title, of each school district for the current school year and shall

perform the following tasks.

(1) Using average daily membership, list for each school district the

number of:

(A) pupils in prekindergarten;

(B) pupils in kindergarten through grade five;

(C) pupils in grades six through eight;

(D) pupils in grades nine through 12;

(E) pupils whose families are at or below 185 percent of FPL, using

the highest number of pupils in the district:

(i) that meet this definition under the universal income declaration

form; or

(ii) who are directly certified for free and reduced-priced meals;

and

(F) EL pupils.

(2)(A) Identify all school districts that have low population density,

measured by the number of persons per square mile residing within the land

area of the geographic boundaries of the district as of July 1 of the year of

determination, equaling:

(i) fewer than 36 persons per square mile;




(ii) 36 or more persons per square mile but fewer than 55 persons

per square mile; or

(iii) 55 or more persons per square mile but fewer than 100

persons per square mile.

(B) Population density data shall be based on the best available U.S.

Census data as provided to the Agency of Education by the Vermont Center for

Geographic Information.

(C) Using average daily membership, list for each school district that

has low population density the number of pupils in each of subdivisions

(A)(i)–(iii) of this subdivision (2).

For each school

district, identify any school with less than 450 students.

(B) As used in subdivision (A) of this subdivision (3), “average two-

year enrollment” means the average enrollment of the two most recently

completed school years, and “enrollment” means the number of pupils who are

enrolled in a school operated by the district on October 1. A pupil shall be

counted as one whether the pupil is enrolled as a full-time or part-time student.




(C) Using average two-year enrollment, list for each school district

that has a small school the number of pupils in each of subdivisions (A)(i)–(ii)

of this subdivision (3).

(c) Reporting on weighting categories to the Agency of Education. Each

school district shall annually report to the Agency of Education by a date

established by the Agency the information needed in order for the Agency to

compute the weighting categories under subsection (b) of this section for that

district


(d) Determination of weighted long-term membership. For each weighting

category except the small schools weighting category under subdivision (b)(3)

of this section, the Secretary shall compute the weighting count by using the

long-term membership, as defined in subdivision 4001(7) of this title, in that

category.





(2) The Secretary shall next apply a weight for pupils whose family is at

or below 185 percent of FPL. Each pupil included in long-term membership

whose family is at or below 185 percent of FPL shall receive an additional

weighting amount of 1.03 0.75.

(3) The Secretary shall next apply a weight for EL pupils. Each EL

pupil included in long-term membership shall receive an additional weighting

13	amount of 2.49 1.50.

(4) The Secretary shall then apply a weight for pupils living in low

population density school districts. Each pupil included in long-term

membership residing in a low population density school district, measured by

the number of persons per square mile residing within the land area of the

geographic boundaries of the district as of July 1 of the year of determination,

shall receive an additional weighting amount of:

(A) 0.15, where the number of persons per square mile is fewer than

36 persons;




(B) 0.12, where the number of persons per square mile is 36 or more

but fewer than 55 persons; or

(C) 0.07, where the number of persons per square mile is 55 or more

but fewer than 100.

(5) The Secretary shall lastly apply a weight for pupils who attend a an

eligible small school
 Then, for each pupil listed under

subdivision (b)(3)(C) of this section (pupils who attend small schools):


each student in an eligible small school will receive a weighted FTE that is the

result of applying the following formula to each eligible small school: (-

0.158*natural log of (school enrollment)) +0.964 with the result rounded to

two decimal places.




(6) A school district’s weighted long-term membership shall equal long-

term membership plus the cumulation of the weights assigned by the Secretary

under this subsection.



(g) Guidelines. The Secretary shall develop guidelines to enable clear and

consistent identification of pupils to be counted under this section.

(h) Updates to weights, base education amount and transportation

payments. On or before January 1, 2027 and on or before January 1 of every

fifth year thereafter, the Agency of Education and the Joint Fiscal Office shall

calculate, based on their consensus view, updates to the weights and the base

education amount to account for cost changes underlying those weights and the

cost of providing a high quality education and shall issue a written report on




their work to the House and Senate Committees on Education, the House

Committee on Ways and Means, and the Senate Committee on Finance. The

General Assembly shall update the weights under this section, the base

education amount, and transportation reimbursement categorical aid amounts

under section 4016 of this title not less than every five years and the

implementation date for the updated weights and transportation reimbursement

categorical aid amount shall be delayed by a year in order to provide school

districts with time to prepare their budgets. Updates to the weights may include

recalibration, recalculation, adding or eliminating weights, or any combination

of these actions.

(i) On or before July 1, 2026 the Secretary shall, through rule-making,

establish eligibility criteria for students that may receive the small school

adjustment as defined in d(5) of this subsection.

§ 4011. EDUCATION PAYMENTS

(a) Annually, the General Assembly shall appropriate funds to pay for

the foundation formula amount as defined under

subdivision 4001(17) of this title and the State guarantee as defined under

32 V.S.A. § 5401(19), and a portion of the categorical aid

amount for each adult education student as

defined in this subsection (f).




(b) For each fiscal year, the categorical aid base amount shall be

$6,800.00, increased by the most recent New England Economic Project

Cumulative Price Index, as of November 15, for state and local government

purchases of goods and services from fiscal year 2005 through the fiscal year

for which the amount is being determined, plus an additional one-tenth of one

percent.

(c) Annually, each school district shall receive an education spending

its foundation formula amount as defined under subdivision 4001(17)

of this title and its State guarantee, if applicable to that school district, as

defined under 32 V.S.A. § 5401(19) for support of education costs. 
No school district shall

receive more than the amount under this subsection.

(d) [Repealed.]

(e) [Repealed.]

(f) Annually, the Secretary shall pay to a local adult education and literacy

provider, as defined in section 942 of this title, that provides an adult education

and secondary credential program an amount equal to 26 percent of the

categorical aid amount for each student who completes the diagnostic portions

of the program, based on an average of the previous two years; 40 percent of

the payment required under this subsection shall be from State funds




appropriated from the Education Fund and 60 percent of the payment required

under this subsection shall be from State funds appropriated from the General

Fund.


(h) The Secretary shall make all payments required by subchapter 5 of

chapter 23 of this title.

(i) Annually, on or before October 1, the Secretary shall send to school

boards for inclusion in town reports and publish on the Agency website the

following information:

(2) a statewide comparison of student-teacher ratios among schools that

are similar in number of students and number of grades.

20	* * *

21	§ 4013. ENGLISH LEARNERS SERVICES; STATE AID




(a) Definitions. As used in this section:

(1) “Applicable federal laws” mean the Equal Education Opportunities

Act (20 U.S.C. § 1703), Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C.

§§ 2000d et seq.), and Titles I and III of the Elementary and Secondary

Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. §§ 6301 et seq. and 20 U.S.C. §§ 6801 et

seq.), each as amended.

(2) “EL services” mean instructional and support personnel and services

that are required under applicable federal laws for EL students and their

families.

(3) “EL students” or “EL pupils” mean students who have been

identified as English learners through the screening protocols required under

12	20 U.S.C. § 6823(b)(2).

(b) Required EL services. Each school district shall:

(1) screen students to determine which students are EL students and

therefore qualify for EL services;

(2) assess and monitor the progress of EL students;

(3) provide EL services;

(4) budget sufficient resources through a combination of State and

federal categorical aid and local education spending to provide EL services;




(5) report expenditures on EL services annually to the Agency of

Education through the financial reporting system as required by the Agency;

and

(6) evaluate the effectiveness of their EL programs and report

educational outcomes of EL students as required by the Agency and applicable

federal laws.

(c) Agency of Education support and quality assurance. The Agency of

Education shall:

(1) provide guidance and program support to all school districts with EL

students as required under applicable federal law, including:

(A) professional development resources for EL teachers and support

personnel; and

(B) information on best practices and nationally recognized language

development standards; and

(2) prescribe, collect, and analyze financial and student outcome data

from school districts to ensure that districts are providing high-quality EL

services and expending sufficient resources to provide these services.


§ 4016. REIMBURSEMENT FOR TRANSPORTATION EXPENDITURES

(a) A school district or supervisory union that incurs allowable

transportation expenditures shall receive a transportation reimbursement grant

each year. The grant shall be equal to 50 100 percent of allowable

transportation expenditures
Transportation grants paid under this section shall be

paid from the Education Fund and shall be added to education spending

payment receipts paid under section 4011 of this title.

(b) In this section, “allowable transportation expenditures” means the costs

of transporting students to and from school for regular classroom services and

shall not include expenditures for transporting students participating in

curricular activities that take place off the school grounds or for transporting

students participating in cocurricular activities. The Agency of

Education, through rule-making, shall further define allowable transportation

expenditures 

(c) A district may apply and the Secretary may pay

for extraordinary transportation expenditures incurred due to geographic or

other conditions 

The Agency of Education shall define extraordinary transportation




expenditures by rule. The total amount of base year extraordinary

transportation grant expenditures shall be $250,000.00 for fiscal year 1997,

increased each year thereafter by the annual price index for state and local

government purchases of goods and services. Extraordinary transportation

expenditures shall not be paid out of the funds appropriated under subsection

(b) of this section for other transportation expenditures.  Grants paid under this

section shall be paid from the Education Fund and shall be added to education

spending payment receipts paid under section 4011 of this title.

9	* * *

§ 4025.  EDUCATION FUND

(a) The Education Fund is established to comprise the following:

(1) all revenue paid to the State from the statewide education tax on

nonhomestead and homestead property under 32 V.S.A. chapter 135, which

shall not include any revenue raised from the school district spending tax under

15	32 V.S.A. § 5402(f);

16	* * *

(b) Monies in the Education Fund shall be used for the following:

(1) To make payments to school districts for the

support of education in accordance with the provisions of section 4028 of this

title, other provisions of this chapter, the provisions of 32 V.S.A. chapter 135,




and the Flexible Pathways Initiative established by section 941 of this title, but

excluding adult education and literacy programs under section 945 of this title.

(2) To cover the cost of fund auditing, accounting, revenue collection,

and of short-term borrowing to meet fund cash flow requirements.


15	* * *

§ 4026. EDUCATION FUND BUDGET STABILIZATION RESERVE;

CREATION AND PURPOSE

18	* * *

If the

stabilization reserve established under this section should in any fiscal year be

less than 5.0 percent of the prior fiscal year’s appropriations from the

Education Fund, as defined in subsection (b) of this section, the Joint Fiscal

Committee shall review the information provided pursuant to 32 V.S.A.

§ 5402b and provide the General Assembly its recommendations for change

necessary to restore the stabilization reserve to the statutory level provided in

subsection (b) of this section.

§ 4027. EDUCATION FUND TRANSFER AMOUNTS


(b) Annually, on or before June 1, each superintendent shall report to the

Agency, on a form prescribed by the Secretary, 

the final adopted budget approved by the district school board.




§ 4028. FUND PAYMENTS TO SCHOOL DISTRICTS

(a) On or before September 10, December 10, and April 30 of each school

year, one-third of the 
base amount as determined under subdivision 4001(17) of this title and

any State guarantee as defined under 32 V.S.A. § 5401(19) shall become due

to school districts,

(b) Payments made for special education under chapter 101 of this title, for

career technical education under chapter 37 of this title, and for other aid and

categorical grants paid for support of education shall also be from the

Education Fund.


(d) The Joint Fiscal Office shall prepare a fiscal note for any legislation

that requires a supervisory union or school district to perform any action with

an associated cost, but does not provide money or a funding mechanism for




fulfilling that obligation.  Any fiscal note prepared under this subsection shall

be completed not later than the date that the legislation is considered for a vote

in the first committee to which it is referred.

4	* * *

§ 4030. DATA SUBMISSION; CORRECTIONS

(a) Upon discovering an error or change in data submitted to the Secretary

for the purpose of determining payments to or from the Education Fund, a

school district shall report the error or change to the Secretary as soon as

possible. Any budget deficit or surplus due to the error or change shall be

carried forward to the following year.

(b) The Secretary shall use data submitted on or before January 15 prior to

the fiscal year that begins the following July 1 in order to calculate the

amounts due each school district for any fiscal year for transportation aid due

under section 4016 of this title.

(c) The Secretary shall use data corrections regarding approved district

budget amounts submitted on or before June 15 prior to the fiscal year that

begins the following July 1, in order to calculate the education payments due

under section 4011 of this title. However, the Secretary may use data

submitted after June 15 and prior to July 15 due to unusual or exceptional

circumstances as determined by the Secretary.




(d) The Secretary shall not use data corrected due to an error submitted

following the deadlines to recalculate weighted long-term membership under

section 4010 of this title. The Secretary shall not adjust average daily

membership counts if an error or change is reported more than three fiscal

years following the date that the original data was due.

(e) The State Board Agency of Education may adopt rules as necessary to

implement the provisions of this section.

§ 4031. UNORGANIZED TOWNS AND GORES

* * * Education Property Tax Rate Formula * * *

Sec. 25. 32 V.S.A. § 5401 is amended to read:

§ 5401. DEFINITIONS

As used in this chapter:

21	* * *




(7) “Homestead”:

(A) “Homestead” means the principal dwelling and parcel of land

surrounding the dwelling, owned and occupied by a resident individual as the

individual’s domicile or owned and fully leased on April 1, provided the

property is not leased for more than 182 days out of the calendar year or, for

purposes of the renter credit under subsection 6066(b) of this title, is rented

and occupied by a resident individual as the individual’s domicile.

8	* * *

9	(8) “Education spending” means “education spending” as defined in 16

10	V.S.A. § 4001(6).

11	* * *

(12) “Excess spending” means:


(13)(A) “Education property tax spending adjustment” means the greater


16	* * *


 (18) “School district-approved spending” means the spending that a

school district approves in excess of the foundation formula amount as defined

in 16 V.S.A. § 4001(17) for the fiscal year and for which no existing revenue

source is available, provided that no school district shall approve spending in

 excess of [X] percent of the school district’s foundation formula amount for

the fiscal year.

 (19) “State guarantee” means an amount equal to the school district’s

 State guarantee rate multiplied by the school district’s approved spending.

 (20) “State guarantee rate” means one minus the ratio of the anticipated

aggregate equalized education property tax grand list of the municipal

members of a school district per the average daily membership as defined

under 16 V.S.A. § 4001(1) of that school district in the following fiscal year to

the anticipated aggregate equalized education property tax grand list of the

municipal members of a school district per the average daily membership as

defined under 16 V.S.A. § 4001(1) of that school district that is the median in




the State in the following fiscal year, provided that no school district’s State

guarantee rate under this subdivision shall be less than zero.

Sec. 26. 32 V.S.A. § 5402 is amended to read:

§ 5402. EDUCATION PROPERTY TAX LIABILITY

(a) A statewide education tax is imposed on all nonhomestead and

homestead property at 
a rate sufficient to raise the

foundation formula amount for the school district for the fiscal year after

accounting for the forecasted available revenues and the State guarantee. It is

the intention of the General Assembly that the statewide education tax rate

under this section shall be adopted for each fiscal year by act of the General

Assembly.

(b) The statewide education tax shall be calculated as follows:




(1) The Commissioner of Taxes shall determine for each municipality

the education tax rate under subsection (a) of this section divided by the

municipality’s most recent common level

of appraisal. The legislative body in each

municipality shall then bill each property taxpayer at the 
rate determined by the Commissioner under this subdivision,

multiplied by the education property tax grand list value of the property,

properly classified as homestead or nonhomestead property and without regard

to any other tax classification of the property. Statewide education property tax

bills shall show the tax due and the calculation of the rate determined under

subsection (a) of this section, divided by 

the municipality’s most recent common level of appraisal
, multiplied by the current grand list value of the property to be

taxed. Statewide education property tax bills shall also include language

provided by the Commissioner pursuant to subsection 5405(g) of this title.

(2) Taxes assessed under this section shall be assessed and collected in

the same manner as taxes assessed under chapter 133 of this title with no tax

classification other than as homestead or nonhomestead property; provided,

however, that the tax levied under this chapter shall be billed to each taxpayer

by the municipality in a manner that clearly indicates the tax is separate from

any other tax assessed and collected under chapter 133, including an




itemization of the separate taxes due. The bill may be on a single sheet of

paper with the statewide education tax and other taxes presented separately and

side by side.

(3) If a district has not voted a budget by June 30, an interim 

education tax shall be imposed at the base rate determined under subdivision

(a)(2) subsection (a) of this section, divided by the number resulting from

dividing the municipality’s most recent common level of appraisal by the

Within 30 days after a budget is adopted and

the deadline for reconsideration has passed, the Commissioner shall determine

the municipality’s tax rate as required under subdivision (1) of this

subsection.

(c)(1) The treasurer of each municipality shall by December 1 of the year

in which the tax is levied and on June 1 of the following year pay to the State

Treasurer for deposit in the Education Fund one-half of the municipality’s

statewide 

education tax, as determined under subdivision (b)(1) of this section.

(2) The Secretary of Education shall determine each municipality’s net

education tax payment 
to the State based on grand list information received by the Secretary

not later than the March 15 prior to the June 1 net payment. Payment shall be




accompanied by a return prescribed by the Secretary of Education. Each

municipality may retain 0.225 of one percent of the total education tax

collected, only upon timely remittance of net payment to the State Treasurer or

to the applicable school district or districts. 

(f)(1) A school district spending tax is imposed on all homestead and

nonhomestead property in each member municipality of a school district that

approves spending pursuant to subdivision 5401(18) of this chapter. The

Commissioner of Taxes shall determine the school district spending tax rate for

each school district at a rate sufficient to raise the amount of the school

 district’s approved spending as certified by the Secretary of Education after




accounting for any State guarantee due to the school district. The legislative

body in each member municipality shall then bill each property taxpayer at the

rate determined by the Commissioner under this subsection multiplied by the

current grand list value of the property to be taxed. The bill shall show the tax

due and the calculation of the rate.

(2) The school district spending tax assessed under this subsection shall

be assessed and collected in the same manner as taxes assessed under chapter

133 of this title with no tax classification other than as homestead or

nonhomestead property; provided, however, that the tax levied under this

chapter shall be billed to each taxpayer by the municipality in a manner that

clearly indicates the tax is separate from any other tax assessed and collected

under chapter 133 and the statewide education property tax under this section,

including an itemization of the separate taxes due. The bill may be on a single

sheet of paper with the school district spending tax, the statewide education

tax, and other taxes presented separately and side by side.

(3) The treasurer of each municipality shall pay all revenue raised from

the school district spending tax imposed under this subsection to its school

district pursuant to 16 V.S.A. § 426.




Sec. 27. 32 V.S.A. § 5402b is amended to read:

§ 5402b. BASE AMOUNT; STATEWIDE EDUCATION TAX YIELDS

RATE;

RECOMMENDATION OF THE COMMISSIONER

(a) Annually, not later than December 1, the Commissioner of Taxes, after

consultation with the Secretary of Education, the Secretary of Administration,

and the Joint Fiscal Office, shall estimate the base amount as defined in 32

V.S.A. § 4001(16) for the following fiscal year and calculate and recommend a

statewide education property tax rate pursuant

to subdivision 5402(a)(1) of this chapter for the following fiscal year. In

making these calculations, the Commissioner shall assume the statutory

reserves are maintained at five percent pursuant to 16 V.S.A. § 4026:


(c) Annually, on or before December 1, the Joint Fiscal Office shall

prepare and publish an official, annotated copy of the Education Fund Outlook.

The Emergency Board shall review the Outlook at its meetings. As used in this

section, “Education Fund Outlook” means the projected revenues and expenses

associated with the Education Fund for the following fiscal year, including

projections of different categories of educational expenses and costs.

(d) Along with the recommendations made under this section, the

Commissioner shall include the range of per pupil school district-approved

spending between all districts in the State for the previous year.

19	* * *




* * * Conforming Revisions; Statewide Property Tax Rate * * *

Sec. 28. 32 V.S.A. § 5404a(b)(1) is amended to read:

(b)(1) An agreement affecting the education property tax grand list defined

under subsection (a) of this section shall reduce the municipality’s education

property tax liability under this chapter for the duration of the agreement or

exemption without extension or renewal, and for a maximum of 10 years. A

municipality’s property tax liability under this chapter shall be reduced by any

difference between the amount of the education property taxes collected on the

subject property and the amount of education property taxes that would have

been collected on such property if its fair market value were taxed at the

equalized nonhomestead rate for the tax year.

12	* * *

Sec. 29. 32 V.S.A. § 5405(g) is amended to read:

(g) The Commissioner shall provide to municipalities for the front of

property tax bills the district homestead property tax rate before equalization,

and the calculation process that

creates the equalized tax rate. The

Commissioner shall further provide to municipalities for the back of property

tax bills an explanation of the common level of appraisal, including its origin

and purpose.




Sec. 30. 32 V.S.A. § 5410(g) is amended to read:


* * * Statewide Property Tax Credit Repeal; Homestead Exemption Created *

8	* *

Sec. 31. 32 V.S.A. § 5400 is amended to read:

§ 5400. STATUTORY PURPOSES

11	* * *

(c) The statutory purpose of the exemption for qualified housing in

subdivision 5404a(a)(6) of this title is to ensure that taxes on this rent-

restricted housing provided to Vermonters of low and moderate income are

more equivalent to property taxed using the State as a homestead rate property

and to adjust the costs of investment in rent-restricted housing to reflect more

accurately the revenue potential of such property.

18	* * *

(j) The statutory purpose of the homestead property tax exemption in

subdivision 6066(a)(1) of this title is to reduce the property tax liability for

Vermont households with low and moderate household income.




Sec. 32. 32 V.S.A. chapter 154 is amended to read:

Chapter 154: Homestead Property Tax Exemption, Municipal Property Tax

Credit, and Renter Credit

§ 6061. DEFINITIONS

As used in this chapter
 Municipal property tax credit” means a credit of the prior

tax year’s municipal property tax liability 
as authorized under section subdivision 6066(a)(2) of this 
chapter.

10	* * *

(9) “Taxable year” means the calendar year preceding the year in which

the claim is filed.

(10) [Repealed.]

(11) “Housesite” means that portion of a homestead, as defined under

subdivision 5401(7) of this title but not under subdivision 5401(7)(G) of this

title, that includes as much of the land owned by the claimant surrounding the

dwelling as is reasonably necessary for use of the dwelling as a home, but in

no event more than two acres per dwelling unit, and, in the case of multiple




dwelling units, not more than two acres per dwelling unit up to a maximum of

10 acres per parcel.

(12) “Claim year” means the year in which a claim is filed under this

chapter.

(13) “Homestead” means a homestead as defined under subdivision

5401(7) of this title, but not under subdivision 5401(7)(G) of this title, and

declared on or before October 15 in accordance with section 5410 of this title.


12	* * *

 (21) “Homestead property tax exemption” means a reduction in the

amount of housesite value subject to the statewide education tax and the school

district spending tax in the claim year as authorized under sections 6066 and

6066a of this chapter.

§ 6062. NUMBER AND IDENTITY OF CLAIMANTS; APPORTIONMENT

18	* * *

(d) Whenever a housesite is an integral part of a larger unit such as a farm or

a multi-purpose or multi-dwelling building, property taxes paid shall be that

percentage of the total property tax as the value of the housesite is to the total




value. Upon a claimant’s request, the listers shall certify to the claimant the

value of his or her the claimant’s homestead and housesite.

3	* * *

§ 6063. CLAIM AS PERSONAL; CREDIT AND EXEMPTION AMOUNT

AT TIME OF

TRANSFER

(a) The right to file a claim under this chapter is personal to the claimant

and shall not survive the claimant’s death, but the right may be

exercised on behalf of a claimant by the claimant’s legal guardian or

attorney-in-fact. When a claimant dies after having filed a timely claim, the

municipal property tax credit and the homestead exemption amount shall be

applied to the property tax liability of the claimant’s estate

as provided in section 6066a of this title.

(b) In case of sale or transfer of a residence, after April 1 of the claim year:

(1) any municipal property tax credit amount related to that

residence shall be allocated to the transferor at closing unless the parties

otherwise agree;

(2) any homestead property tax exemption related to that residence

 based on the transferor’s age and household income under subdivision

6066(a)(1) of this chapter shall cease to be in effect upon transfer; and




(3) a transferee who is eligible to declare the residence as a homestead

but for the requirement to own the residence on April 1 of the claim year shall,

notwithstanding subdivision 5401(7) and subsection 5410(b) of this title, be

eligible to apply for a homestead property tax exemption in the claim year

when the transfer occurs by filing with the Commissioner of Taxes a

homestead declaration pursuant to section 5410 of this title and a claim for

exemption on or before the due date prescribed under section 6068 of this

chapter.

9	* * *

§ 6065. FORMS; TABLES; NOTICES

(a) In administering this chapter, the Commissioner shall provide suitable

claim forms with tables of allowable claims, instructions, and worksheets for

claiming a homestead property tax exemption and municipal property tax

credit.

(b) Prior to June 1, the Commissioner shall also prepare and supply to each

town in the State notices describing the homestead property tax exemption and

municipal property tax credit for inclusion in property tax bills. The notice

shall be in simple, plain language and shall explain how to file for a homestead

property tax exemption and a municipal property tax credit, where to find

assistance filing for a credit, an exemption, or both, and any other related

information as determined by the Commissioner. The notice shall direct




taxpayers to a resource where they can find versions of the notice translated

into the five most common non-English languages in the State. A town shall

include such notice in each tax bill and notice of delinquent taxes that it mails

to taxpayers who own in that town a residential property, without regard for

whether the property was declared a homestead pursuant to subdivision

5401(7) of this title.

(c) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (b) of this section, towns

that use envelopes or mailers not able to accommodate notices describing the

homestead property tax exemption and municipal property tax credit may

distribute such notices in an alternative manner.

§ 6066. COMPUTATION OF HOMESTEAD PROPERTY TAX

EXEMPTION, MUNICIPAL

PROPERTY TAX CREDIT, AND RENTER CREDIT


(1) An eligible claimant who owned the homestead on April 1 of the claim

year shall be entitled to a homestead property tax exemption in the claim year

in an amount determined as follows:

(A) for a claimant whose household income is equal to or less than

$47,000.00 and who is 65 years of age or more as of December 31 of the year

 in which the claimant’s household income is taken into account, the exemption

 shall be 70 percent of the claimant’s housesite value, provided the exempt

amount of housesite value shall not exceed $200,000.00;

(B) for a claimant whose household income is equal to or less than

$47,000.00 and who is less than 65 years of age as of December 31 of the year

 in which the claimant’s household income is taken into account, the exemption

 shall be 60 percent of the claimant’s housesite value, provided the exempt

amount of housesite value shall not exceed $200,000.00;

(C) for a claimant whose household income is greater than

$47,000.00 but equal to or less than $90,000.00, the exemption shall be 50

 percent of the claimant’s housesite value, provided the exempt amount of

housesite value shall not exceed $200,000.00;

(D) for a claimant whose household income is greater than

$90,000.00 but equal to or less than $125,000.00, the exemption shall be 10




 percent of the claimant’s housesite value, provided the exempt amount of

housesite value shall not exceed $50,000.00; and

(E) for a claimant whose household income is greater than

$125,000.00, no amount of housesite value shall be exempt under this section.

(3)(2) A An eligible claimant who owned the homestead on April 1 of

the claim year and whose household income does not exceed $47,000.00 shall

also be entitled to an additional a credit amount from against the claimant’s

municipal taxes for the upcoming fiscal year that is equal to the amount by

which the municipal property taxes for the municipal fiscal year that began in

the taxable year upon the claimant’s housesite exceeds a percentage of the

claimant’s household income for the taxable year as follows:

If household income (rounded	then the taxpayer is entitled to

credit for the

to the nearest dollar) is:	reduced property tax in excess of

this percent

of that income:

17	$0.00 — 9,999.00	1.50

18	$10,000.00 — 47,000.00	3.00


to the nearest dollar) is:	credit for the reduced property tax

in excess of this percent of that

income:

9	$0.00 — 9,999.00	0.5

10	$10,000.00 — 24,999.00	1.5

11	$25,000.00 — 47,000.00	2.0

(5)(3) In no event shall the homestead property tax exemption provided

for in subdivision (1) of this subsection reduce the housesite value below zero.

In no event shall the municipal property tax credit provided for in subdivision

(3) or (4) (2) of this subsection exceed the amount of the reduced municipal

property tax. 

(b)(1) An eligible claimant who rented the homestead shall be entitled to

a credit for the taxable year in an amount not to exceed $2,500.00, to be

calculated as follows:




1	* * *

(c) To be eligible for an adjustment exemption or credit under this chapter,

the claimant:

(1) must have been domiciled in this State during the entire taxable year;

(2) may not be a person claimed as a dependent by any taxpayer under

the federal Internal Revenue Code during the taxable year; and

(3) in the case of a renter, shall have rented property for at least six

calendar months, which need not be consecutive, during the taxable year.

(d) The owner of a mobile home that is sited on a lot not owned by the

homeowner may include an amount determined under subdivision 6061(7) of

this title as allocable rent paid on the lot with the amount of property taxes paid

by the homeowner on the home for the purpose of computation of credits the

municipal property tax credit under subdivision (a)(3)(2) of this section, unless

the homeowner has included in the claim an amount of property tax on

common subsection (e) of this section.

(e) Property taxes paid by a cooperative, not including a mobile home park

cooperative, allocable to property used as a homestead shall be attributable to

the co-op member for the purpose of computing the credit of property tax

liability of the co-op member under this section. Property owned by a

cooperative declared as a homestead may only include the homestead and a pro

rata share of any common land owned or leased by the cooperative, not to




exceed the two-acre housesite limitation. The share of the cooperative’s

assessed value attributable to the housesite shall be determined by the

cooperative and specified annually in a notice to the co-op member. Property

taxes paid by a mobile home park cooperative, allocable to property used as a

housesite, shall be attributed to the owner of the housesite for the purpose of

computing the credit of property tax liability of the housesite owner under this

section. Property owned by the mobile home park cooperative and declared as

a housesite may only include common property of the cooperative contiguous

with at least one mobile home lot in the park, not to exceed the two-acre

housesite limitation. The share attributable to any mobile home lot shall be

determined by the cooperative and specified in the cooperative agreement. A

co-op member who is the housesite owner shall be entitled to a property tax

credit in an amount determined by multiplying the property taxes allocated

under this subsection by the percentage of the exemption for which the

 housesite owner’s household income qualifies under subdivision (a)(1) of this

section.

(f) [Repealed.]

(g) Notwithstanding subsection (d) of this section, if the land surrounding a

homestead is owned by a nonprofit corporation or community land trust with

tax exempt status under 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3), the homeowner may include an

allocated amount as property tax paid on the land with the amount of property




taxes paid by the homeowner on the home for the purposes of computation of

the credit property tax liability under this section. The allocated amount shall

be determined by the nonprofit corporation or community land trust on a

proportional basis. The nonprofit corporation or community land trust shall

provide to that homeowner, by January 31, a certificate specifying the

allocated amount. The certificate shall indicate the proportion of total property

tax on the parcel that was assessed for municipal property tax and for statewide

property tax and the proportion of total value of the parcel. A homeowner

under this subsection shall be entitled to a property tax credit in an amount

determined by multiplying the property taxes allocated under this subsection

 by the percentage of the exemption for which the homeowner’s household

income qualifies under subdivision (a)(1) of this section.

(h) A homestead owner shall be entitled to an additional property tax credit

equal to one percent of the amount of income tax refund that the claimant

elects to allocate to payment of statewide education property tax

under section 6068 of this title.

(i) The homestead property tax exemption and the municipal

property tax credit under subsection (a) of this section shall be calculated

without regard to any exemption under subdivision 3802(11) of this title.




§ 6066a. DETERMINATION OF HOMESTEAD PROPERTY TAX

EXEMPTION AND

MUNICIPAL PROPERTY TAX CREDIT

(a) Annually, the Commissioner shall determine the homestead property tax

exemption and the municipal property tax credit amount under section 6066 of

this title, related to a homestead owned by the claimant, based on the prior

taxable year’s income and for the municipal property tax credit, crediting

property taxes paid in the prior year, and for the homestead property tax

exemption, exempting the housesite value in the claim year. The

Commissioner shall notify the municipality in which the housesite is located of

the amount of the homestead property tax exemption and municipal property

tax credit for the claimant for property tax liabilities on a monthly

basis. The municipal property tax credit of a claimant who was assessed

property tax by a town that revised the dates of its fiscal year, however, is the

excess of the property tax that was assessed in the last 12 months of the revised

fiscal year, over the adjusted property tax of the claimant for the revised fiscal

year, as determined under section 6066 of this title, related to a homestead

owned by the claimant.

(b) The Commissioner shall include in the total homestead property tax

exemption and municipal property tax credit amount determined under

subsection (a) of this section, for credit to the taxpayer for homestead statewide




education property tax and school district spending tax liabilities, any income

tax overpayment remaining after allocation under section 3112 of this title and

setoff under section 5934 of this title, which the taxpayer has directed to be

used for payment of property taxes.

(c) The Commissioner shall notify the municipality of any claim and refund

amounts unresolved by November 1 at the time of final resolution, including

adjudication, if any; provided, however, that towns will not be notified of any

additional credit amounts after November 1 of the claim year, and such

amounts shall be paid to the claimant by the Commissioner.

(d) [Repealed.]

(e) At the time of notice to the municipality, the Commissioner shall notify

the taxpayer of the homestead property tax exemption amount

determined under subdivision 6066(a)(1) of this title, 
municipal property

credit amount due the homestead owner under subdivision

6066(a)(2) of this title, the amount of income tax refund, if any, allocated to

payment of statewide education property tax liabilities, and any

late-claim reduction amount.

(f)(1) For taxpayers and amounts stated in the notice to towns on or before

20	July 1, municipalities shall create and send to taxpayers a property

21	tax bill, instead of the bill required under subdivision 5402(b)(1) of this title,




providing the total amount allocated to payment of statewide

education property tax liabilities and notice of the balance due. Municipalities

shall apply the amount of the homestead property tax exemption allocated

under this chapter to current year property taxes in equal amounts to each of

the taxpayers’ property tax installments that include education taxes and the

amount of the municipal property tax credit allocated under this chapter to

current year municipal property taxes in equal amounts to each of the

 taxpayers’ property tax installments that include municipal taxes.

Notwithstanding section 4772 of this title, if a town issues a corrected bill as a

result of the notice sent by the Commissioner under subsection (a) of this

section, issuance of the corrected new bill does not extend the time for

payment of the original bill nor relieve the taxpayer of any interest or penalties

associated with the original bill. If the corrected bill is less than the original

bill, and there are also no unpaid current year taxes, interest, or penalties, and

no past year delinquent taxes or penalties and interest charges, any

overpayment shall be reflected on the corrected tax bill and refunded to the

taxpayer.

(2) For homestead property tax exemption and municipal property tax

credit amounts for which municipalities receive notice after November 1,

municipalities shall issue a new homestead property tax bill with notice to the




taxpayer of the total amount allocated to payment of homestead property tax

liabilities and notice of the balance due.

(3) The homestead property tax exemption and municipal property tax

credit amount determined for the taxpayer shall be allocated first to current

year housesite value and property tax on the homestead parcel, next to current-

year homestead parcel penalties and interest, next to any prior year homestead

parcel penalties and interest, and last to any prior year housesite value and

property tax on the homestead parcel. No homestead property tax exemption or

municipal credit shall be allocated to a housesite value or property tax liability

for any year after the year for which the claim or refund allocation was filed.

No municipal tax-reduction incentive for early payment of taxes shall apply to

any amount allocated to the property tax bill under this chapter.

(4) If the homestead property tax exemption or the municipal property

tax credit amount as described in subsection (e) of this section exceeds the

property tax, penalties, and interest due for the current and all prior years, the

municipality shall refund the excess to the taxpayer, without interest, within 20

days of the first date upon which taxes become due and payable or 20 days

after notification of the exemption or credit amount by the Commissioner of

Taxes, whichever is later.

(g) The Commissioner of Taxes shall pay monthly to each municipality the

amount of municipal property tax credit of which the municipality was last




notified related to municipal property tax on homesteads within that

municipality, as determined by the Commissioner of Taxes.

§ 6067. CLAIM LIMITATIONS

(a) Claimant. Only one individual per household per taxable year shall be

entitled to a a homestead exemption claim, property tax credit claim, or both

under this chapter.

(b) Other states. An individual who received a homestead exemption or

credit with respect to property taxes assessed by another state for the taxable

year shall not be entitled to receive a credit under this chapter.

(c) Dollar amount. No taxpayer claimant shall receive a renter credit under

subsection 6066(b) of this title in excess of $2,500.00. No taxpayer claimant

shall receive a municipal property tax credit under subdivision 6066(a)(3)(2) of

this title greater than $2,400.00 

§ 6068. APPLICATION AND TIME FOR FILING

(a) A homestead property tax exemption or municipal property tax credit

claim or request for allocation of an income tax refund to homestead statewide

education property tax payment shall be filed with the Commissioner on or

before the due date for filing the Vermont income tax return, without

extension, and shall describe the school district in which the homestead

property is located and shall particularly describe the homestead property for




which the exemption or credit is sought, including the school

parcel account number prescribed in subsection 5404(b) of this title. A renter

credit claim shall be filed with the Commissioner on or before the due date for

filing the Vermont income tax return, without extension.

(b)(1) If the a claimant files a municipal property tax credit claim after

6	October 15 but on or before March 15 of the following calendar year, the

municipal property tax credit under this chapter:

(1)(A) shall be reduced in amount by $150.00, but not below $0.00;

(2)(B) shall be issued directly to the claimant; and

(3)(C) shall not require the municipality where the claimant’s property is

located to issue an adjusted homestead property tax bill.

(2) If a claimant files a homestead property tax exemption claim under

this chapter after October 15 but on or before March 15 of the following

calendar year, the claimant shall pay a penalty of $150.00 and the municipality

 where the claimant’s property is located shall not be required to issue an

adjusted property tax bill.

(c) No request for allocation of an income tax refund or for a renter credit

claim may be made after October 15. No homestead property tax exemption or

municipal property tax credit claim may be made after March 15 of the

calendar year following the due date under subsection (a) of this section.

21	* * *




§ 6070. DISALLOWED CLAIMS

A claim shall be disallowed if the claimant received title to his or her the

 claimant’s homestead primarily for the purpose of receiving benefits under this

chapter.

§ 6071. EXCESSIVE AND FRAUDULENT CLAIMS

(a) In any case in which it is determined under the provisions of this title

that a claim is or was excessive and was filed with fraudulent intent, the claim

shall be disallowed in full and the Commissioner may impose a penalty equal

to the amount claimed. A disallowed claim may be recovered by assessment as

income taxes are assessed. The assessment, including assessment of penalty,

shall bear interest from the date the claim was credited against property tax or

income tax or paid by the State until repaid by the claimant at the rate per

annum established from time to time by the Commissioner pursuant to section

3108 of this title. The claimant in that case, and any person who assisted in the

preparation of filing of such excessive claim or supplied information upon

which the excessive claim was prepared, with fraudulent intent, shall be fined

not more than $1,000.00 or be imprisoned not more than one year, or both.

(b) In any case in which it is determined that a claim is or was excessive, the

Commissioner may impose a 10 percent penalty on such excess, and if the

claim has been paid or credited against property tax or income tax otherwise

payable, the municipal property tax credit or homestead exemption shall be




reduced or canceled and the proper portion of any amount paid shall be

similarly recovered by assessment as income taxes are assessed, and such

assessment shall bear interest at the rate per annum established from time to

time by the Commissioner pursuant to section 3108 of this title from the date

of payment or, in the case of credit of a municipal property tax bill under

section 6066a of this title, from December 1 of the year in which the claim is

filed until refunded or paid.


12	* * *

§ 6073. RULES OF THE COMMISSIONER

The Commissioner may, from time to time, adopt, amend, and

withdraw rules interpreting and implementing this chapter.

§ 6074. AMENDMENT OF CERTAIN CLAIMS

At any time within three years after the date for filing claims under

subsection 6068(a) of this chapter, a claimant who filed a claim by October 15

19	may file to amend that claim with regard to housesite value, 

 housesite municipal tax, and ownership percentage or to correct

the amount of household income reported on that claim.




* * * Conforming Revisions; Property Tax Credit Repeal * * *

Sec. 33. 11 V.S.A. § 1608 is amended to read:

§ 1608. ELIGIBILITY FOR PROPERTY TAX RELIEF

Members of cooperative housing corporations shall be eligible to apply for

and receive a homestead property tax adjustment exemption and municipal

property tax credit under 32 V.S.A. § 6066, subject to the conditions of

eligibility set forth therein.

Sec. 34. 32 V.S.A. § 3102(j) is amended to read:

(j) Tax bills prepared by a municipality under subdivision 5402(b)(1) of this

title showing only the amount of total tax due shall not be considered

confidential return information under this section. For the purposes of

calculating credits the homestead property tax exemption and the municipal

property tax credit under chapter 154 of this title, information provided by the

Commissioner to a municipality under subsection 6066a(a) of this title and

information provided by the municipality to a taxpayer under subsection

6066a(f) shall be considered confidential return information under this section.

Sec. 35. 32 V.S.A. § 3206(b) is amended to read:

(b) As used in this section, “extraordinary relief” means a remedy that is

within the power of the Commissioner to grant under this title
or a remedy that makes changes to a taxpayer’s homestead property

tax exemption, municipal property tax credit, or renter credit claim necessary

to remedy the problem identified by the Taxpayer Advocate.

* * * Education Fund Advisory Committee * * *

Sec. 36. REPEAL; EDUCATION FUND ADVISORY COMMITTEE

The following are repealed on July 1, 2025:

(1) 32 V.S.A. § 5414 (Creation; Education Fund Advisory Committee).

(2) 2024 Acts and Resolves No. 183, Sec. 12 (Education Fund Advisory

Committee sunset).




